## Introduction ## 

Jimmy Carter entered office determined to implement a new approach to national  strategy. He wanted “to help create a stable, just, and peaceful world order” that  was “more responsive to human aspirations.”2 Carter recognized that competition  with the Soviet Union and the attendant risk of conflict were likely to persist but  also envisioned the possibility of increased cooperation and the stabilization of  U.S.-Soviet relations. Carter committed to counterbalancing Soviet military power  and influence in key areas, such as Europe, the Middle East, and East Asia, by  maintaining the overall balance of military power and competing politically with  the Soviet Union. In the political competition, however, the United States would  rely on a basic commitment to human rights and national independence. It would  also seek Soviet cooperation to resolve regional conflicts and would encourage  constructive Soviet engagement in global trade and development.3  As part of his new approach to foreign policy, Carter had pledged to pursue  complete nuclear disarmament in his inaugural address.4 The SALT II talks inherited from the Ford Administration became the vehicle the Carter Administration  used to further reduce nuclear weapons. At the Vladivostok Summit in November  1974, Ford and Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev had agreed on a basic framework  for a SALT II agreement capping each side’s strategic delivery vehicles at 2,400  and multiple independent reentry vehicles (MIRVs) at 1,320; however, questions,  including how cruise missiles fit into the agreement and whether the Soviet  Tu-22M Backfire bomber was a strategic weapon, remained and the negotiations  languished. Carter sought to reinvigorate the talks by proposing drastic new  limits on strategic nuclear delivery systems and MIRVs for both sides (1,800 to  2,000 strategic delivery vehicles and 1,100 to 1.200 MIRVs), but retaining the  U.S.-preferred range definitions for cruise missiles in exchange for an agreement  that the Backfire was not a strategic weapon. The United States also wanted to  freeze deployment, limit testing, and ban modification of existing ICBMs and to  halt development of new ones.5 When Secretary of State Cyrus Vance presented  the new proposal to Moscow in March 1977, the Soviets rejected it out of hand.  Negotiations soon resumed, however, and Carter and Brezhnev signed the SALT II  Treaty, which closely resembled the Vladivostok agreement, on 18 June 1979.  Carter submitted the treaty to the Senate for ratification four days later, but withdrew it from consideration in January 1980 after the Soviets invaded Afghanistan. 
Both the United States and the Soviet Union nevertheless agreed to abide by the  treaty provisions.6  Any effort to reduce reliance on nuclear weapons would require improving  conventional capabilities to defend Western Europe from Soviet attack. Heavy U.S.  spending on military operations in Vietnam had led Congress to cut significantly  defense spending for conventional force modernization and readiness. When  Carter entered office, the U.S. forces assigned to the defense of Europe were using  outdated equipment and their readiness was low. The Europeans were reluctant  to divert money from social welfare spending to pay for defense when they considered a war unlikely. Meanwhile, the Soviet Union had significantly improved  its conventional forces and enjoyed numerical superiority in everything except  helicopters and tactical nuclear weapons. The Allies still retained a technological  edge but it appeared to be fading. The consensus was that NATO was not prepared to counter a Soviet conventional attack in Central Europe.7 The Chairman of  the Joint Chiefs of Staff reported, “In Central Europe, the chance of NATO stopping  a Warsaw Pact attack with minimal loss of territory and then achieving its full objective of recovering that land which had been lost appears remote at the present  time.” It was, perhaps, possible to stabilize a defensive line in Central Europe and  prevent the Soviets from reaching the French border and the North Sea coast, but  not without losing territory.8 American policymakers were concerned that NATO’s  weakness would force it to resort to a nuclear defense, which risked escalation.  To improve NATO’s collective capabilities, the Carter Administration pursued several  options. It pushed for member nations to increase military spending by three percent (real growth) every year. The administration also pressed NATO to improve  cooperation in research, development, production, and procurement of armaments  with an emphasis on rationalization, standardization, and interoperability, and to  formulate a long-term defense program to strengthen the alliance over time.9 The  Europeans were concerned, however, that improving their defensive capabilities  while the Americans reduced their strategic nuclear weapons might allow the  United States to withdraw its nuclear guarantee, leaving Western Europe susceptible to Soviet diplomatic and military pressure, particularly in light of the new,  longer-range Soviet ballistic missile, the SS-20. Consequently, the United States  agreed to discuss strengthening NATO’s theater nuclear posture. After extensive  negotiations, the NATO defense and foreign ministers announced in December  1979 that the Alliance would modernize its nuclear systems by deploying groundlaunched cruise missiles and Pershing II ballistic missiles in Europe.10  In Asia, the United States sought to reduce its military presence and to explore  expanding relations with China. During the 1976 presidential campaign, Carter  promised to withdraw U.S. combat troops from South Korea. Soon after entering  office, he ordered the withdrawal of two army brigades from South Korea before  the end of his term in 1980.11 The U.S. military and the intelligence community  opposed the plan as did the South Koreans. They feared that the South Koreans  would be unable to stop a North Korean attack without U.S. combat troops. Congress refused to fund either the withdrawal or the provision of security assistance  to ease South Korea’s concerns. In the end, the Administration withdrew just one  surface-to-air missile battalion and 1,500 support troops. The assassination of South Korean President Park Chun Hee on 26 October 1979, and the rise to power of military strongman Chun Do Hwan further complicated U.S.-South Korean relations.12  While the Carter Administration’s policies regarding South Korea foundered, its  attempts to improve relations with China were more successful. Carter’s National  Security Advisor, Zbigniew Brzezinski, wanted to normalize relations with China in  order to pressure the Soviet Union. Secretary of Defense Harold Brown and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General George Brown agreed. General Brown  noted, “The PRC can play an important role in a U.S. worldwide strategy for dealing with the Soviet Union.”13 Washington and Beijing established full diplomatic  relations in January 1979. After the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in December  1979, U.S. representatives discussed the sale of nonlethal military equipment  and advanced technology to China as well as how to respond to Soviet actions in  Afghanistan and to support Pakistan. Normalizing relations with China also meant  the end of the close U.S. military relationship with Taiwan. U.S. facilities were  shuttered and all U.S. troops left the island soon after normalization; a one-year  embargo was placed on U.S. arms sales to Taiwan, after which, the United States  provided only older, defensive weapons to Taiwan.14  Events in the Middle East during the Carter Administration altered the strategic  context dramatically. Carter met with Egyptian President Anwar Sadat and Israeli  Prime Minister Menachem Begin soon after taking office and urged them to  continue the reconciliation talks initiated during the Ford Administration. After  Congress approved the sale of military aircraft to both Egypt and Israel in May  1978, Carter invited the leaders of the two countries to the presidential retreat at  Camp David in the hope of advancing the peace process. The Camp David Accords  signed in September 1978, built a framework for peace in Middle East and led to  the Egypt-Israel Peace Treaty signed on 26 March 1979.  In Iran, the U.S.-backed Shah, Mohammed Reza Pahlavi, fell from power in January  1979. Pahlavi had introduced social and economic reforms in the 1960s, but refused  to allow political freedom. His failure to maintain economic progress while spending vast sums on modern weaponry weakened his popular support and led to a  revolution that forced him to leave the country. On 4 November 1979, soon after he  came to the United States for cancer treatment, radical Iranian students seized the  U.S. embassy in Tehran and took 66 hostages. Although the Iranians freed 14 hostages, negotiations to secure the release of the remaining 52 proved fruitless and an  American rescue operation in April 1980 was unsuccessful. The hostages were not  released until the day Carter left office; they had been in captivity for 444 days.  In Afghanistan, Marxist/Leninist politicians had overthrown the government in April  1978. When enthusiasm for the new government began to wane, the Soviet Union  invaded to aid and sustain communist revolution. The invasion shocked Carter  and prompted his administration not only to support Afghan rebels fighting the  Soviets but also to adopt a much firmer stance against the Soviet Union around the  world.15 Coming on the heels of the seizure of the U.S. embassy in Iran, the Soviet  invasion of Afghanistan dampened any optimism within the Carter Administration  regarding the U.S. position in the Middle East or the relationship with the Soviet  Union that the Egypt-Israel Peace and SALT II Treaties might have engendered. 

## Outline for 8 April 1994 Talk  
[Note: Italicized items were not discussed during the interview.]  
### Brown period  
1. Change in modus operandi/relation with Brown  
    — Special character of Harold Brown; Brown as reader  
    — Best, most productive period; final shape of net assessment  
2. Israeli talks continue  
    — Experience  
    — Nuclear case  
    — Failure in end/McGiffert  
3. Special successes  
    — ASW assessment (grade: A)/story—Northern Flank  
    — C3I—>change in doctrine (B+)  
    — Naval (A)  
    — Power projection (B+)  
    — Investment balance (A)  
    — Also B+  
        • ‘80s strategic forces  
        • ‘80s NATO/Warsaw Pact  
        • Soviet assessments (‘80s)  
    — Failures  
        • Training  
        • Maintenance/logistics/story of  
4. Soviet economy  
    — Igor Birman  
    — Vladimir Shlapentokh  
    — Feshbach (RAND work on demographics; Soviet problems—>health/ecology—long-term burden) [Arrow in handwritten outline indicates this point ties  in with “Investment balance (A)” above]  
### Format developed [Common structure of assessments]  
1. How to think about balance  
2. Description of trends and asymmetries  
3. Assessment  — Deterrence/Soviet assessment  — If war comes, how do we do  
4. Issues

### 1977–1980  
- Marshall: Then we come to the Brown period, which in some respects is the best  period this office has had in the sense of its impact, I think. We had some interesting products to send, and Brown was a fantastic reader. And he also wanted to  act on, use these things. So if we would send papers up, he would look at them.  By that time we had, as I say, assessments where we had interesting products. We  would send up a package, which would be a cover memo of maybe two, three,  or four pages, which would give the main points, but also maybe contained  some things that were very sensitive; then there would be the main assessment,  which would have an executive summary, which might be 10 pages or something  like that; and then a longer thing, which might be 150 pages. You would send  them up to Brown and three or four days later they’d come back with all kinds  of annotations through the whole, nearly 200 pages. At least every two or three  pages there was something—he had read the whole thing. Now, we didn’t send  them up every day; four or five a year, something like that. And then he would put  a note on it about who else should go and see it and what action requests should  be made based on it. And then we would prepare these memos for him to sign.  By that time, I would say we were doing the following: We did a strategic forces  assessment, which I was never quite satisfied with. The only time I think we ever  did a reasonably good job on that was in the early ‘80s. There was the strategic,  naval or maritime, {…}. Oh, one of the things that happened back in the Rumsfeld  period was a request that came from the Ford White House for a {…}. Then we did  a second one for Brown, which we’ll come back to, which was probably the most  influential assessment we ever wrote, I think.  
- Q2: Who in the Ford White House asked for it?  
- Marshall: I don’t remember.  
- Q2: Who got it?  
- Marshall: It would have gone up to the NSC.  
- Q2: Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Brent Scowcroft?  
- Marshall: Probably, yeah.  OK. So in the Brown period, the balance assessments we were doing were the  strategic, the maritime, {…}, power projection, NATO-Warsaw Pact—a kind of  Central Region assessment—and we were doing a Northern Flank assessment,  which we’ll say a bit more about.  Beginning in ‘76, while Rumsfeld was still here, we got a request from William  Clements, who was the Deputy Secretary of Defense then, relayed from the  Congress, who were raising some problems about continuing to fund future  programs like anti-jam or something. The Congress requested that there be a net  assessment in the command, control, communications and intelligence area. So  we did one that started in ‘76 and was finished in ‘77 or maybe early ‘78. Then we  did another one right after it that further developed it.16 We started doing this Investment Balance. That might have started in the Rumsfeld  period, but the first ones were really produced then. And we did, toward the end  of the Brown period, a Korean assessment and had the beginnings of a broader  Asian assessment.  
- Q2: Is that the set?  
- Marshall: I think so.  
- Q2: Strategic, naval, {…}, power projection, NATO-Warsaw Pact/Central Region,  Northern Flank, C3I, investment, and Korean assessments. You did nine assessments in four years?  
- Marshall: Well, sometimes they were done twice.  
- Q2: I mean that’s not only maybe the most, I mean that’s not… You said the Brown  period was the best period for Net Assessment in terms of the impact. It looks  like also in terms of productivity. I don’t think you ever had any four-year period  where you produced nine assessments.  
- Marshall: Yeah, probably not. And so, maybe I should talk a little bit about some of  those {…} We had planned, at one point, that there’d be a Central Front, a Northern Flank, and a Southern Flank, but we never— The Northern Flank thing not  only was a natural thing to do, but Roche and I became convinced fairly early that  people were looking at that region in the wrong way, in that primarily it needed  to be looked as a maritime theater. And that, whereas people in NATO and the traditional things all looked at it in terms of how much of northern Norway one was  going to lose, probably the Soviets didn’t care very much about northern Norway,  except for either putting it out of existence or moving in and using the air bases  along the coast, and that the real focus of attention for them was this maritime  region on their perimeter.  There was some interesting data that we knew of that suggested that if you looked  back at their exercises, that you could see that there was some suggestion they  were trying progressively over time to control a bigger and bigger area. Then along  came some very interesting information, probably around ‘75, maybe ‘76, that came  to us as information from analysis being done at BDM by Admiral Robert Welander,  looking at Soviet exercises there, which were the first reason we had to believe  that the whole notion of how the Russians were going to deploy and use their  naval assets, as believed by the American Navy, was incorrect.17 That they had at  sometime—I don’t know when analysts went back and really reconstructed exactly  when it was—but by the middle ‘70s, they already had adopted this “bastion  strategy,” and that therefore all of the assets, surface and underwater, were going  to be used, initially, primarily to defend this area and to protect their nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines. And a little after that, we came to know that there  was some actual intelligence that suggested that that was really right. And that all  fitted with our notion about how they, in fact, looked at the Northern Flank.  Therefore {…} we tried to make this case that… By the way—I don’t know the  exact date of the conversion of the U.S. Navy—the U.S. Navy initially resisted this.  
- Q2: Strange.
- Marshall: Well, they…  
- Q2: No, not strange at all.  
- Marshall: What Jim Roche and I saw right away was that if this is true, it is such a  strategic advantage to us. Since the Navy was all primed to try to erect screens  to keep the Soviet submarines from going into the Atlantic and sinking all of the  convoys on the way over, if they’re not even going to try that, for a variety of reasons, this is just terrific. And we need to do whatever it takes to keep them doing  this. So we wrote this assessment, which I think in some ways is not only the most  effective thing we did, but it also had only two readers, I mean outside of the  Navy, which were Brown and Charles Duncan. In fact, the Navy turned down a  request from Bill Perry to see it later.  
- Q2: Perry wanted to see it and the Navy wouldn’t let him?  
- Q3: Forgive me, Duncan was at this time?  
- Marshall: The Deputy Secretary of Defense, Brown’s deputy.  
- Q2: Perry was the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering.  
- Marshall: Yeah. And the Navy still is quite sensitive about this particular thing, because I  asked recently, and they looked at it and they decided, “No… Out!” Anyway, it was  very effective, because Brown read it and was convinced by what we said. And it was  such a big shift to see that there was this strategic gain to be made by keeping them  doing this, that we had this gain, unrecognized, but now you could exploit this. {…}  
- Q3: My inclination is to let you go on, but I remember you saying that the Investment Balance also had a big impact.  
- Marshall: Yeah, but that’s a longer term and more diffuse effect.  
- Q3: Well, it had a direct effect in the sense of stopping the decline in U.S. budgets in  the short term?  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  The other thing that I know that Jim feels, or has some stories or feedback about  via the Navy, is that the maritime assessments we did in the middle ‘70s also had a  good effect, because we made the case that… Well, let me go back a bit.  One of things that had bothered me about some things that had happened in  the very early ‘70s was that here as a country we had had a strategy relative to  the Russians which relied to some extent on nuclear, strategic superiority. Then  we get into these SALT negotiations with them and settle for parity. And then  there’s no reaction. I mean we didn’t say, “Well, here we have our strategy; we had  superiority here and that allowed us to maybe be inferior in certain areas,” and so  on. So we settled for parity there and make no correction in the rest of the thing.  In fact, I asked William Hyland, who was helping Henry Kissinger write his book  about his years at the White House and at State, and I said, “Look, I don’t remember there ever being any kind of consideration of, ‘Well, having given this up, what  other adjustments do we make?’” And he said, “Yes, I’ve been back through all the  papers and I don’t see any, either.” Which strikes me as just not the way to run a  country, or to have a strategy where you do this. So one of the arguments that Jim and I pushed is, “Here are these various balances.  We’re ahead in the maritime area. That’s a good thing. We ought to be ahead in something. It’s hard to say that we’re ahead in the balance in Europe, or here and here.  This is something we are ahead in, we ought to welcome that, and exploit that, and  do something with it.” And somehow that argument got to Brown, and he stopped  hacking away at the Navy; I mean it’s alleged that that happened. I don’t know  enough about the story to know whether that’s right, but Jim thinks that that’s so.  
- Q2: You know, you might ask Brown whether or not…  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q2: …he thought, saw…I mean, because of the three Secretaries that you lay out as  being sort of the best ones—Schlesinger, Rumsfeld, Brown—it’s really on their watch  that we went to nuclear parity and didn’t change our military strategy. So you  might go back and ask those guys, “Did this going to nuclear parity bother you?”  
- Marshall: Umm-hmm.  
- Q2: Did you do any thinking? I mean, maybe this is one of the things that caused  Brown to…  
- Marshall: Yeah, I don’t know. Well, it bothered Schlesinger. He wasn’t in favor of it.  People in the White House and so on wanted that. It wasn’t anything he was in  favor of.  
- Q2: Well, but the question really is, if the State Department and White House are  going to do stupid things like that, what’s the Defense Department…  
- Marshall: Yeah, I understand that. Yeah, right.  
- Q2: …going to try to compensate for it. I mean, limited nuclear options in one way,  shape, or form.  
- Marshall: Again, Schlesinger was in favor of being ahead anyplace we could be ahead.  So this didn’t come up. The reason this came up was that in the Brown period  there were people here—some guys in PA&E—who were for just kind of whacking away at the Navy, too. “We’re spending too much! Why are we ahead anyplace?” was sort of their attitude. “Aren’t we overinvesting? We’re ahead! My God!”  So I would say the things that had some effect were certainly this{…} The naval,  maritime thing had some effect. The power projection thing did, too, in that it  had some role in the setting up of the Central Command—we became exercised  enough about that. The Investment Balance, I think, defines the whole level, size,  nature of the Soviet program.  
- Q5: Would you say a little… I mean, I’m just curious how you feel about that from,  looking back now. I mean, it’s the whole issue of, you know, going almost back to  the beginning of this thing, you’re starting to beat on, say, CIA—  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q5: —about, you know, What’s the real defense burden? As the Berlin Wall was  falling, the last sort of set of testimony … I think maybe we got them up to 17 or  18 percent of gross national product or something. I mean that was DIA.18
- Marshall: Right, yeah.  
- Q5: And I think your last view was…  
- Q2: …33 percent?19  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q5: Which is a, you know, really nontrivial difference, I mean…  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q5: We did World WarII in the ‘40s with that.  
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q5: So the difference between 11 and 12 percent, or maybe, occasionally, 16 or 17  percent and 30 is, or 33 is…  
- Marshall: I agree. I agree with that.  
- Q5: But, I mean, in a sense, it’s sort of like the earlier comment about giving up  nuclear parity. I mean, didn’t in the aggregate the office sort of— While all the  instincts were right, the office tried to get the right views and collect the data and  everything, I mean in a way this was a failure. The office never convinced anybody,  and they’re an intelligence organization.  
- Marshall: Well, especially them, I guess.  
- Q2: Lastly them.  
- Marshall: But I think what was possible, in terms of convincing people, was to show  that the size of their program relative to ours was substantial. The burden thing—I  was probably never successful in quite getting them into that, to adopt the view  that I would have had.  I guess the sequence for myself went back to the late ‘60s and early ‘70s. Both  Schlesinger and I were quite sure that the intelligence estimates of the percentage of GNP going to the Soviet military were just crazy. They started out  around six percent, in their view, and that just was ridiculous. Initially, the focus of  criticism was that they were just underestimating the size of the Soviets’ program  and the cost of it. Then they changed and for a variety of reasons they moved it  up to the 12-, 13-percent level.20 So, much of the ‘70s was used up in beating on  them about why they were underestimating all the things they were neglecting  to include and so on.  You got more and more ammunition as you got the emigres coming out that  had all kinds of very interesting anecdotes about things. One of the more striking  ones I’m sure I’ve talked to all of you about was this naval architect who told this  story about the tanker fleet to support the fishing fleet. You find out that the  whole size and character is really determined by the Soviet Navy because they  wanted to use them.21 And the fact was that the whole Navy did use the merchant  marine and other maritime assets, whose specifications they influenced, but they  weren’t counted as being in the Navy or part of the naval assets. Or this story  about this roll-on/roll-off ship that had this extensive set of exhaust fans and so  on that could only be required if you’re going to have a whole bunch of things with their motors running at the same time in order to rush off the landing or  something like that.  
- Q2: Well, and gun mounts on merchant, commercial ships…  
- Marshall: Yeah, or electromagnetic pulse hardening and…  
- Q3: I recall when you ran this sort of undercover intelligence operation. You had this  guy pose as a guy looking to buy one of these ships. He went and said, “Gee, all  your electrical cables are running in this armored conduit down the spine of the  boat. Why do you do it that way?”  
- Q2: “Ah… to protect them from careless sailors.”  
- Marshall: So, much of the ‘70s was spent beating on them about all the things they  were ignoring and ought to be costing.  
- Q3: But just on the Investment Balance, in response to the earlier statement  suggesting it did not change anyone’s mind…I thought the big victory with the  Investment Balance was in [indistinct] which was that people were, just by habit,  “Well, here’s our budget for 1976, here’s their budget for 1976…” And the Investment Balance says these things are cumulative.  
- Marshall: Yes, right.  
- Q3: These things are cumulative and look at what it looks like when you put it all  together. And people went…like that, as I recall.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q2: The other thing is the burden issue, though. In the ‘80s when the office was  working on competitive strategies, one of the reasons the office was able to get  Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger to do anything on that was Graham  Allison. And Graham, you know, was very taken with this notion of, we were going  to try—I mean it wasn’t his idea, it was Andy’s… And there was a meeting here  one day with Graham when he said, “Andy you want to impose costs on those  guys and take away every last ruble they’ve got.” And Andy said, “Yes. That’s right.”  But, I mean, if there’s an intellectual one, in the sense that people… If it was only  six percent of GNP, people would say, “This is hopeless”…low number, you know.  But if it’s 17 percent or 30 percent, people start to say, “Well, wait a minute. That’s  a pretty big burden, and if we impose a couple more costs on them, we can get  them to allocate the resources differently or stop the competition or collapse  or something.” It became much more feasible and possible. So when you had  people like Allison taken on board that can convince Weinberger that we should  do something like competitive strategies because it can make a difference, then  the Investment Balance has this indirect, you know, intellectual, psychological effect—although it still begs the question of, “What did you get out of competitive  strategies?” and I won’t get into that, but you know…good idea.  
- Q3: My memory, Andy—and you’re much more intimately involved in this—is that  one of the few marginalia that Weinberger ever passed back was on the Investment Balance, sort of to the effect, “Gee, are you one of these liberals who thinks  that the Soviet military is full of obsolete equipment?” when your point was we  should work to make their big investments obsolete.
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q3: And he was saying, “Oh gee, you guys think they’re no good.”  
- Marshall: No, Weinberger never got it.  
- Q2: Well, he sent you marginalia on that Washington Post article, too, didn’t he? About  you and what you were doing in Net Assessment. That you had a great campaign  under way to seize the intellectual leadership of the Department away from him.  
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q2: But, I mean, direct effects? Weinberger, and I’m trying [indistinct] through  Graham and other people.  
- Marshall: Right. To go back to this business of the burden: My first thing was just  to get them to get a more adequate accounting of the size of the Soviet effort  and to count some of these things that were not included in their normal definition  of what’s in the budget. It was only really toward the very end of, like, ‘79, ‘80, and  in the early ‘80s, that I became convinced—I hadn’t really been looking at their  estimate of the GNP so much—that that was also wrong. And you had this kind  of crazy situation where they were underestimating the size of the military efforts  and overestimating the size of the GNP. So you had kind of both effects, when  you looked at the level, looked at the burden. And the first things there that were  convincing to me was really some of the stuff that Igor Birman and some of the  other emigres started talking about.  
- Q2: Vladimir Shlapentokh do some stuff for you, too?  
- Marshall: Shlapentokh, although we didn’t get in touch with him until probably ‘81  or something like that.  
- Q3: Fyodor Kushnirsky and some of those people like that?  
- Marshall: I don’t know. Birman is the one I remember the most. What was the  name of… I’m trying to think of the name of one of the other emigres…Vladimir  Bukovsky.  
- Q3: Bukovsky, yeah, the other guy. Kushnirsky did the stuff on inflation.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right, right. Of course, there are other things. For example, I give a  lot of credit to Jim Billington, who I first met through Ellsworth; Schlesinger knew  him, but I didn’t. He came over and gave a talk on his view of the religious revival  that was beginning in Russia, in the Soviet Union, probably in '76.  The other thing to mention about the Brown period in the ‘70s—I’d have to go back  and check—was that we did start to look at Russian demographics. Initially, we got  into that because of the impact of some stuff that Murray Feshbach did, when he  was still in the government, about the changing racial and ethnic composition of  the conscription cohort. It was rapidly going to be the situation that half or more  of the men presenting themselves would be coming from these Asian ethnic groups,  who had generally somewhat lower skills, but also whose Russian wasn’t very good.  So we had these very good studies by Enders Wimbush and the people at RAND  to try to understand, If that happened, what would be the impact?22 What were these people used for? We were able to pin down the fact that a lot of them went  off to serve in the railroad troops—  
- Q3: Transport companies.  
- Marshall: —transport companies. That they tended for a long time not to be used in  combat elements, or not very much.23 And again, we had a resounding flop with the  people in the intelligence community, who pooh-poohed that that was any problem.  But then, because of this sense of the Soviet defense burden, when Feshbach  left the Department of Commerce and the demographics group there, I started  supporting his research on the Soviet health situation, because it seemed to me  that, first, that was interesting because of its direct effects on the military, but  also, from this point of view of the GNP, that if this was an area which had been  slighted and underinvested in—and there was some evidence already that life  expectancy was either stagnant or… I think it was only later when it started to  come down, beginning in the late ‘60s or so…  Resources needed for health care would amount to a competing claim on investment. In the first place, if the health of the society went down, that in itself undermined their ability to do well in those areas. But also, human beings don’t like  it that an extraordinary proportion of their children are born with birth defects  and so on. In fact, I tried to get the United States Information Agency people, in  the beginning years of the Reagan Administration, to actually start broadcasting  some of this material on health problems in the Soviet Union. I thought that one  of the things we ought to be doing is stirring up these competing demands. But  you could never get them to do that sort of thing. Part of the cost-imposing thing  is to impose costs, drive up their costs, but also try to encourage demands that  would compete for investment. Health care, and later, environmental pollution,  etc.—which were related items—were things that they were underinvesting  in, and which eventually, somehow or another, they would have to correct and  would have to become, long term, up to something like Western levels of expenditure. Therefore, if you’re looking at the future allocation of their resources, that  was an interesting thing to take a look at. So I sponsored this stuff by Feshbach.  Initially, of course, it was mainly in the health area, and then toward the end, I got  him focused also on these environmental issues.  
- Q5: Seas going away and other minor details.  
- Marshall: Yeah. So that’s about…  
- Q2: When was the Gorman armor…  
- Marshall: That was done in the middle ‘70s, around ‘75 [1974–1977).  
- Q2: Under Rumsfeld, then. Was he…or ‘74?  
- Marshall: The Gorman study may well have started under Schlesinger.  One of the other things that we felt needed a lot more work was the information  on these qualitative performance aspects of military forces. So we tried to get each  of the Services to undertake a study in the training area. Only the Army one succeeded.  It was a tribute to Gorman. It’s the best study any Service ever did for me. Really good.  And as I mentioned, there was a complementary study {…} And there was an Army organization out there that then put all that stuff together in a big study that was  very, very, very interesting. That was all part of that effort. The Air Force effort on  tactical pilot training was poor. The Navy study was abysmal. I just never got much.  We made another effort under Brown and got him interested in this. We tried to  get an effort looking at maintenance and repair and how that was done. Some of  it came from the fact that Roche and I felt that one of the more interesting things  about the Soviet Navy was the contrast to ours, where when ships leave port,  their level of things that are available and working actually go up. In the Soviet  Navy, the minute they leave port, things start shutting down, because they don’t  have the skilled people. They have a system where most of the maintenance is  done by people ashore, where they can have the skilled people. The people who  are actually on the ships are not trained well enough. Also, their ships are built,  or were built then, in such a way that they didn’t have the same space devoted  to workshops. Also, the internal designs were such that there wasn’t— Ours are  designed so people can easily get around and maintain equipment and that’s not  true for them; they have much more close quarters. So their ships are fundamentally designed to be kept up in port and then they go. We wanted to understand  more about that, get that down more. So we tried. In fact, we got Brown, I think,  to send off a tasker to each of the Services. Again we got very little.  I was very impressed by one of the things that came out of the ‘73 war. The Israelis  and the Egyptians started with essentially the same number of tanks. The Israeli  tanks, on the average, got back into the battle three times. The Egyptians, once.  And, therefore, if you’re looking at the balance, thinking of actual combat, it was  a terrific advantage for the Israelis, who had crews go out and collect the stuff,  repair it, put new crews in, and so on, for the things that were reparable. So the  Israelis’ tanks rotated three times and the other guys’ tanks rotated once. It was  very important to know that, to understand that, to get that into your judgment  and calculations—which nobody does—and, therefore, it’s very important to  understand how the Soviets would operate, etc.  We always got into a lot of that sort of thing. For example, these various practices  on the Soviet side of the tanks that were going to fight being kept in garages and  started maybe once a week and kept lubricated and so on, while there’s another  set of tanks that they actually use at training ranges and so on, in order to have  tanks that are ready to go, that have very low mileage on them and therefore  have a certain number of expected hours of performance. It’s totally different  from us. So we need to know all these things in order to understand, and think  about, and prepare. And the whole Soviet system was an adaptation to the fact  that it was a conscript army, [indistinct] population, relatively low-skill levels. This  had some impact on the proportion of officers, which is much higher for them,  and on everything—how the equipment is designed, the practices, everything.  Then there’s another level, which has to do with social-cultural factors, because  [indistinct] are designed to fight. Jim and I used to make something of the fact  that on the Soviet naval ships you’d find delivery systems, weapons, that don’t have  matching sensors. We don’t build ships like that because of our thinking that a  ship can fight individually and the captain of a ship is a responsible, serious, decision-making person. On the Soviet side that’s not the case. The thing is commanded by someone above him. The sensors may be on one ship, the strike weapon on  another. The airplanes—similar things. You could see [that] where responsibility  and decision-making lies was just totally different in comparison to our military,  and so was reflected very much in the kind of weapons that are designed.  And in our tank platoons, everybody talks to everybody, and we share out targets,  and so on. But in the Soviet small unit, only the platoon commander speaks and  they all shoot at one target and then he shifts to another one.  At any rate, the one last thing to say is—it happened before the Brown period,  or at the beginning of the Brown period—there came to be a general structure  to all of the assessments. Each had a first section, which was on how to think  about this balance. This was very important, I think, because the most important  thing in some sense that we had to offer was a suggestion about, “Here’s the way  you ought to think about this.” Then there was a section that’s really information  on trends and asymmetries; straight, descriptive material about what are these  [indistinct] really like. And then there was an assessment section, which would  focus, depending on what was said in how you ought to look at this balance and  particularly how you ought to measure things… But there’s no measures of merit.  But very often, given our general strategy, it was deterrence. So a great deal of the  assessment would be, “Are we deterring those guys? How do they look at it? How  do they size things up?” And then there’s some exploration of, “What if deterrence  fails? How do we do against our measures?” Maybe two, three, or four contingencies would be examined. It was probably the weakest part of the assessment  because we don’t have models that are worth a goddam. If you had war games, if  you had some way of…  
- Q2: Well, it’s not just models. We really didn’t understand, really, in many cases, how  the other side was going to fight, you know. And so…  
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q2: …your confidence in… [indistinct] best models in the world if you’re not  reflecting how the other guy’s really going to fight.  
- Marshall: Yeah, that’s right. It’s certainly very dependent on initial conditions, circumstances, precisely how they’re going to fight and so on.  And then the assessment would address the issues. What are real, strategic,  SecDef-level management issues? Because of the way we got started under  Schlesinger, the whole notion was that we were doing something for the Secretary or other very high-level officials. Therefore, that meant that the kind of  perspective you had, the kind of issues you wanted to illuminate, were strategic  management issues. We weren’t doing this assessment for the theater commander and his immediate problems.  
- Q3: I have one overall response or comment. A lot of the developments that you  describe occurred as a result of happy accidents: that Schlesinger was brought in,  then was succeeded by Rumsfeld, and wassucceeded by Brown, and you were  there at the time, and someone like Jim Roche was around, and other talented  people. 
- Marshall: Right, yeah.  
- Q3: At another level, you could say that in a way there was a logic of history. This  was the period during which, kind of thinking back to what the period was, people had a real sense of urgency and crisis. We were in big trouble at home, come  out of a disastrous war, the Soviets were capitalizing on it by modernizing their  forces while we were not…  
- Marshall: Right. They were running around the world knocking off this place or the  other, right.  
- Q3: The Power Projection Balance emerges out of your sense that they have a real  long-term way of thinking about this and that…  
- Marshall: Well, it’s not only that, the power projection one. It’s a certain amount  of statements by some of the people that suggested they’d gone into a new  business.  
- Q3: That’s right. So listening to it… Again, I’m thinking about how a reader who is  not intimately involved with this whole thing would— You look at the list of the  balances that you put out and the kind of attention that they got, and it’s really an  extraordinarily productive and effective period for the office. To what extent was  that the result of necessity, that there was this sense of there were real problems  to be solved? Now, not everybody had this perception. I remember Harry Rowen  going off to RAND saying, “Well, we’ve solved, intellectually, all these problems  and now—we should shift RAND over to doing domestic policy analysis.”  
- Marshall: Ah, yes. Right.  
- Q3: So, you know, that’s kind of a different perspective. Again, from the standpoint  of the book and the reader, it might be interesting to contrast the interaction  of the perceived—from a strategic level—problems that the United States was  facing, and your activity. Especially in contrast with the ‘60s, before the ‘70s, and  the ‘80s, actually, because in the ‘80s, [indistinct] very roughly, people kind of said,  “Yes, there is a problem but we know the answer. We’ll just spend a lot of money.  And therefore we don’t have to be too sophisticated about it. We’ll just spend a  lot of money.” And in the ‘60s, there was a sense, “Well, we’d solved the problem.” Is  that perception at all correct? That the impact of the office and the utility of it, was  a result, in part, of the perceived, you know, pure crisis that people thought we  were going through, or is that just reading too much logic back into this thing?  
- Marshall: No, I think there’s something in that. I think that there certainly were  fortunate accidents. I think that’s true. The whole thing could have aborted in the  Carter period had it not been for somebody like Brown as Secretary. And there  certainly was a certain sense of crisis and concern among some parts of the establishment because of what seemed like evident Soviet successes. So I think there’s  something…  
- Q3: Paul Nitze cranks up the Committee on the Present Danger…  
- Q2: On the other hand, you had détente, you had large arms control—SALT, MBFR  [Eds: Mutual and Balanced Force Reductions]; you name it, we’re going to control it—  
- Q3: Right. 
- Q2: —you had Jimmy Carter going in and saying we’d had an “inordinate fear of  communism” and now we’re going to work with these guys, stuff like that.  
- Q3: I didn’t say this perception was universally shared.  
- Q2: Well, not even at some of the highest levels of government. I mean, you’ve got  Cy Vance in there, and then you’ve got a number of Presidents and Secretaries in  other places that are kind of going, “Things aren’t bad. We can work with these  guys. We can cut deals. There’s not a problem.”  
- Marshall: I guess there’s one other thing about the Brown period which is kind of  interesting, and that was Sam Huntington at the NSC. The other things that were  favorable were Brzezinski and Sam. They did this PRM-10 [Presidential Review  Memorandum 10] effort that Sam led and William Odom was there helping him.24  Because of the character of that thing, Brown asked us to be the point of contact  for this net assessment thing they were doing. So we worked very closely with  them, and that was another part of the context.  
- Q2: PD-59 Presidential Directive 59—you work on that, too?  
- Q3: Oh yeah, the Leon Sloss thing, countervailing strategy.  
- Marshall: Yes, right. In fact, Walter Slocombe [Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary  of Defense for International Security Affairs] and I ran that, really, for Brown.25 And  it was another part of the general sorts of things that were…  
- Q2: I think we’re back to luck.  
- Q3: No, no, no—I mean your point’s well taken. Like for every Sam there was a Lynn  Davis [Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Policy Planning] and there is a  Paul Warnke [Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency] for every Zbig  Brzezinski. But there was a significant community of people, you know, all through  the ‘70s that said, “The United States really is in a very difficult situation, much worse  than we’ve been since the end of World War II, in a way.” And not everybody responded to this. But there was enough of a community to stand on procedure this  way that there was support for and a market for the kinds of things that Andy was  turning out. I suspect luck plays a role, but the fact there’s a sense of urgency means  that smart people, talented people tend to gravitate toward solving the problem  and thinking about the problem, which, you know, may have played a role.  
- Q2: You had once said you thought that General David Jones [Chairman of the Joint  Chiefs of Staff) was a very good…  
- Marshall: What I felt was…getting on all these guys…and the Committee on the  Present Danger and all these things. I guess in response to some of the criticisms, I  said that I thought that in the history books, people like Brown and Jones were going  to look a lot better than these guys who were raising this level of alarm and so on.  
- Q2: Could you say a few things about what Jones did as Chairman that you found to  be particularly, you know, hopeful or interesting.  
- Marshall: Well, I don’t have a lot of specifics. He was certainly very open and helpful  to me. Well, there were things that began, and, again, I don’t know what we can  do here… Because of some of these concerns we were speaking of, there was this sense—somewhat stimulated by the Investment Balance that we did—of, “These  bastards are outspending us!” And that was certainly true for a while, I think. They  may have done it very wastefully, but the size of their effort, when you think of  the actual size of their economy, was just fantastic. Part of the countering of that  involved … There were new kinds of exercises on our part.  There was more of this conscious effort at trying to impact on their perceptions  and General Jones was part of that. {…} And then there were all of these programs that Brown and Perry launched.  
- Q2: Like stealth.  
- Marshall: Stealth and precision weapons.  
- Q2: Were you involved in the stealth deliberations at all?  
- Marshall: No.  
- Q2: That has been, at least from the ‘80s, one of the problems that the office has  had. That is, that the office just never really got access to a number of the special  access programs and things that were going on.  
- Marshall: Right, right.  
- Q2: Now, in some ways that’s a benefit, because you don’t get captured by the  “techno-weenies” that want to claim these magic widgets will solve all our problems. But, in other cases when there really is something that’s a serious effort like  stealth going on and, the office doesn’t know about it, it’s tough to make a really  good judgment…  
- Marshall: Well, I personally knew something serious about the stealth area, I guess,  in the early ‘80s, something like that.  
- Q5: It was made clear fairly early on that the office wasn’t doing certain equipment/  technical/hardware kinds of assessments. And yet, thinking about something like  stealth, or thinking about the history of things like precision weapons, and how  long it takes to get those things done…it seems like that’s an aspect of the competition that it doesn’t appear the office was ever real focused on. Maybe it kind  of gets back to the point about, well, you got [indistinct] and you got an annual  budget cycle and you do everything in weapons systems, and it’s just hard to look  beyond those sort of “cookie cutter” concepts, the way they divide the thing out.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q2: Well, for example, the F-117 achieved initial operational capability in ‘83 or  something like that and the office in ‘85, ‘86, ‘87 is trying to do a NATO-Warsaw  Pact Balance, part of which is looking at the air-to-air balance, but also air-toground and all that other stuff, and the office is not folding in the F-117s at all.  
- Q5: Well, the same thing is going on right now with the B-2.  
- Q2: Yeah, but people at least now know about the B-2. And I may not know all the  characteristics and capabilities stuff, but you can…  
- Q5: But there’s this perverse, sort of like bad aftertaste from all the various security  guys, which is, Well, I could…for something like, say, seminar war-gaming you can play it. But in the more detailed models that go into things like we used and  this stuff, if you continue to hold the real information that you need to actually be  able to play it realistically SAR [special access required], and you never cough that  up, then the modelers are kind of…  
- Q2: Just scratching their heads.  
- Q5: So there’s another way in which things cannot be played or just can’t reflect all  the balances.  
- Marshall: Yeah. These things can have an effect. To move ahead a little bit, when we  did the strategic balance thing in ‘82, ‘83, which I think on the whole was probably the best thing which we’ve done on the strategic balance thing, there were  three big things that I knew about that couldn’t be in the assessment. And so, I  arranged to meet with Weinberger and to remind him—I mean he knew about  these programs—that there were three other things that he knew about that  made the situation much more favorable than this assessment indicated, which  itself was fairly favorable. One was the B-2 and stealth, which I knew about at that  time. {…} stuff we can’t talk about. I indicated to him that these are also part of the  picture, and you ought to understand that and read the thing in that light. So sometimes it’s possible to do a little bit on that. But basically there just is this problem  with special access programs, and sometimes they can have very great effects.  Q3: A question on a different subject. As you’ve said, this is the period in which the  mode of operations of Net Assessment basically jelled.  
- Marshall: Yes, right.  
- Q3: Internally, what was most striking was the way in which you utilized the people  in the office, the analysts, from the standpoint of, how to put it…  
- Q3: You would give absolutely minimal guidance.  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q3: And—it appeared at the time and afterwards—you didn’t want people to kind  of do what happened in other analytical offices, which is, figure out what the boss  wants to hear, and how he wants it done, and then just do it that way.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q3: And what you wanted, you actually wanted, to the extent possible, you wanted  people to actually think about these things.  
- Marshall: Yes, yes.  
- Q3: So that was deliberate?  
- Marshall: Oh yes.  
- Q3: OK.  
- Marshall: Well, I’d say two things. One is that some of the “crypticness” may just be  personal, idiosyncratic. But the other part is that that was very conscious. I really  wanted people to think about their particular balance. I’m not kidding when I say  I think that this, “How to think about it,” how to really structure the thing, is very  important and a very productive thing for people to work on. Now, some people succeed at doing that, but not everybody does. I really looked at these things,  in some way, as analogous to having people do PhD theses on some particular  things. Of course, in lots of ways I had my own views, and I tried to nudge people  in that direction. Also, once we had a relatively good assessment in an area, I always tried to encourage people to read the previous assessment and sometimes  I was a little discouraged by the fact that they didn’t seem to learn a lot by doing  that. They didn’t really take on board the…  
- Q3: Painful. Alright, yes…  
- Marshall: No, I mean that they didn’t…  
- Q3: It’s very striking because it’s very different from the ways in which other analytical shops are set up, which they say, “Here’s the methodology.”  
- Q2: Especially in government.  
- Q3: And now, by the way, PhD dissertations are now done that way—“Here’s the  way you do it. You do it this way”—which has a very stifling effect. I guess I became self-conscious about this when I was talking to Ed Luttwak about something else—remember he was working with Martin van Creveld on some of those  things—and he said, “Andy Marshall. You walk into his office and he kind of mumbles at you for a couple minutes and then you go away and do the best research  you’ve ever done in your life. I don’t understand how it works.” [Indistinct]  
- Marshall: Yeah…  
- Q3: But again, it’s useful because it just kind of helps illuminate how the office  worked, but it’s also helpful for other people trying to think about how to set up  productive research organizations.  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q3: Because everybody sort of says, “What is net assessment? What’s the ‘net’? What  is it?” …don’t know exactly. And as I said, my hunch had been it was partly deliberate strategy. It’s a way of getting people to think outside of certain boxes.  
- Marshall: Yes. I also should have mentioned earlier that certainly part of my deliberate strategy, feeling, was to keep people away from proposing answers. That  the real function of Net Assessment is diagnosis and analysis, assessment of the  situation, and not to provide the answers. That it’s dangerous if we go into the  assessment already having made up our minds about what the answers are.  
- Q2: I always thought that was one of the key things about this office, that it didn’t  try to do the strategic planning or policy. It tried to do the assessment and then  you’d give that— I mean, in part, you used to say that was because you didn’t  want people cooking the books, you know, you didn’t want the guys sort of  saying, “Well, I’m going to ignore that part of the information because it doesn’t  fit with my recommendation, you know, that I’ve already preconceived.” But  I think also there…very useful to approach that methodologically within the  Department, because all these guys doing policy—and even if you had a strategic  planning shop—very busy with sort of day-to-day, you know, even strategic planning guys, real…I don’t want to say “real world,” but things that Andy has kept out  of Net Assessment, so to speak. So that people can be more reflective and think about these diagnostic kinds of things. And I’ve always felt that was one of the  key factors in the success of the office.  
- Q3: There are several phrases engraved in my head as a result of this experience.  One of them is, “You keep giving me solutions. Stop giving me solutions. Why  don’t you tell me what the problem is?” The other phrase, which is indelibly  burned in my mind is, “Why don’t you go out and do some research for a change?”  
- Q2: Well, Marshall told me that up front, “Take six months. Read everything.”  
- Q3: No, no, no. This was after I’d taken six months. I thought I was doing analysis. Did  you observe other people using this way of running analysts or is this something  that you arrived at on your own by hit or miss? Or anything special? Personalities?  
- Marshall: I don’t know. It’s some combination of the last two, I guess. No, I haven’t  observed other people particularly doing this kind of thing. Although to the  extent that there would be some formative things for me in that respect, it really  would be RAND in the early days and people like Charlie Hitch and so on.  
- Q2: The other part of the office that always struck me as being really a significant  departure from the way the rest of the Building works is in dealing with programs  and projects.  
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q2: You know, 99.9 percent of the people in the Building deal with programs and  budgets. This office doesn’t. And one thing you get out of that is people, other  organizations don’t feel threatened, because you’re not out there trying to take  away their budget money or their program. So they’re more willing to cooperate  with you, especially at the lower levels, where you might find smart analysts and  things like that. You know, they don’t feel like they’re betraying their Service or  whatever, it’s not going to cost them money, etc. Now, how did you settle on that  kind of approach, I mean, because clearly you could see how— I mean, you still  get from some people in Net Assessment today, “How’s this going to affect the  Program Objective Memorandum, and what does this mean for what we should  be acquiring?” and things like that, you know. So I think they’re all the wrong  questions, but how come you decided to separate all that out?  
- Marshall: I think it’s just part of focusing on the diagnosis: What is the problem?  What are the issues? What are the opportunities? What is it that’s really there or  what are the things that are shaping the future? Partly, it was that I think I was  very aware that it was tactically an advantage bureaucratically, but I was also very  concerned about people having the answers, pushing programs, pushing things,  and corrupting the assessment and not really focusing in on that. I had some  concern about that.  
- Q2: Part of that kind of approach argues against getting access to special access  programs and, you know, SAR kinds of things, because you don’t want people doing assessments to think, “Aha! There really is a silver bullet out there that’s going  to solve the problem four years down the…”  
- Marshall: Well, I think it would be better if we had had a bit more access to the  special programs, just the information. Over time I’ve been involved in or had access to a lot of things that other people  in the office did not. Some of it has come as a by-product of my sitting on the  Chief of Naval Operations Executive Panel, where we got a bunch of stuff on that.  Also, when I was at the NSC, I got involved in various kinds of things, largely in the  intelligence world.  
- Q2: [Indistinct] people would like to draw lessons on how to do this right in the  future and maybe one of the things is you get the access, but your analysts don’t,  but then you can say, “No, that’s probably not a good…Go think about that some  more.” How and when did you get involved in the CNO Executive Panel?  
- Marshall: When I was on the NSC. It was formed in ‘72, in the spring or something.  I was asked to join it in the summer, after the first meeting, actually. Exactly why  that happened, I don’t know. It started, of course, with a bunch of people who I  knew very well that were on it, like Albert Wohlstetter and Rowen, and so on. So I  was asked to join.  
- Q2: Who was the Chief of Naval Operations?  
- Marshall: Admiral Elmo Zumwalt. It was a much smaller group then, about 10, 12  people.  
- Q2: But there’s really been no other Service—I mean, you played around with the  Defense Science Board stuff and everything—but there’s really been no other  Service, other than the Navy and the CNO Executive Panel, that you really had  that kind of relationship…  
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q3: From the standpoint of the book that this will turn into, you mentioned that  this is a lot of material here and maybe there should be two chapters. I think that’s  right. And I think the logical division on the basis of this talk would be kind of  the organizational and larger context which gave rise to the birth of Net Assessment—the discussion of Schlesinger and your work at NSC. And then the second  chapter would be focusing on the balances themselves, their intellectual content,  their impact, and so forth. That’s very rough, but seems to me good enough. And  since there’s 10 balances, nine balances to go through, that’s…  
- Marshall: Yeah. I think at one point, when you look at all that we ever did, there’s  probably something like 12 or 13.  
- Q2: What was the worst balance you ever did?  
- Marshall: The worst? I don’t know. Well, the Southern Flank never got launched. We  never really succeeded at all.  
- Q5: As I said earlier, we eventually collected…  
- Q3: Yeah, we never figured what that one was about.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q2: Was there something about that?  
- Marshall: And we never quite did anything in the area of space. We kept trying, you  know, “Well, we ought to do that…” 
- Q2: Well, George Kraus, remember, had that one good piece that then the National  Reconnaissance Office stole and said, “You’re not going anywhere with this piece,  thank you very much.” It wasn’t really an assessment…  
- Marshall: Yeah, right. Too much bureaucratic resistance. I guess I’ve never been  entirely satisfied with the Strategic Balance. 
-  Q2: That’s probably a personal standard that goes back many decades.  
- Q5: Yeah, I think that’s right.  
- Q2: And you’ll never be satisfied with that one.  
- Q3: Are there things that in retrospect during this period you would have done  differently, or you thought it was going to work out or turn out…on, or…I mean,  it was a very productive period.  
- Marshall: No, I don’t feel that way. I think things went extraordinarily well.  
- Q5: Yeah, I think all things considered, it turned out to be very…I don’t know why you’d  be depressed, or even not relatively pleased. Because there were certainly lots of  opportunities for this whole thing to collapse, implode, be squashed out of existence.  
- Q2: We haven’t got to the Weinberger years yet. We’ll talk about that a little next time.  
- Q5: But you know, in a way, given what’s happened since that, I mean, that too,  since one of the sort of right hands for Weinberger who made my life unpleasant  at a certain point later became Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, I mean Colin  Powell, remember…  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q5: That’s a more interesting personality than he seemed at the time…  
- Q3: Again, I’m listening to this, but also kind of keeping in mind about the broader  audience. There really is this extraordinary sense of detachment. I mean, most  people would look at the 1970s and say, well, the Vietnam War came to an end,  and there’s a lot of arms control going on, and the forces were downsizing. And  the perspective for you yourself is you really pulled way back from that.  
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q3: And [indistinct] book suggests that Zumwalt had that approach also. Because he  makes this in reference, in passing, that Zumwalt decided when he became CNO,  that the Vietnam War was going to be lost anyway. No point spending his time worrying about it. Kind of assigned—that’s for a junior officer. So let me think about  the long-term health of my organization and what are the issues relevant to that.  
- Marshall: Yes, right.  
- Q3: And that’s why he spent so much time on race relations, because that was the  key to getting recruitment of the kind of people he needed. But it will strike people who have lived through that period as, “Gee, this is a very different cut on the  period, a very different perspective.”  
- Q5: Well, if you think about it, we got through this whole period today without once  mentioning Vietnam. At a certain point I thought about, well, should I raise… mention something about that? But, yeah, you’re right, I mean the way you put it  is exactly right on. There was a much longer-term, broader perspective.  
- Marshall: Right. Well you know, when Schlesinger was here I used to talk with him  about some aspects of Vietnam, but he really didn’t want us to be particularly  involved with that, we were doing other things. And also, I personally had not  much interest in Vietnam and same was true when I was at RAND. A lot of RAND  people got very lost in Vietnam. I didn’t. I continued looking at the Soviets. I did  get involved a little bit toward the end, when some people were starting up some  “lessons learned” activities. I got a little bit involved in some of that. But personally, I  didn’t get very engaged with respect to the Vietnam War.  
- Q3: And my reading of that was that you thought it was peripheral to the central  competition.  
- Marshall: Yeah. My feeling on Vietnam was that probably this was a strategic mistake to get involved, but if we were involved, we ought to flatten the place and  stop screwing around. I couldn’t understand why we didn’t mine the harbors, sink  the ships right from the beginning.  
- Q2: Right.  
- Q3: The office was productive in this period, partly because Andy was smart, he  was thinking about [indistinct], partly obviously because he recruited a bunch of  very talented people. And I’m trying to figure out… Again—pure luck? Or other  factors which tend to make it more comprehensible that he got you, he got Jim  Roche, he got…Greg Kuzniewski was here, I think in that period.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right. Jerry Dunne.  The other thing to mention was that in the Brown period, the office was the  biggest it has ever been.  
- Q2: How many people?  
- Marshall: Seventeen.  
- Q2: Wow. Not in here? Seventeen people?  
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q2: You didn’t have room for some of them?  
- Marshall: Yes there was room.  
- Q2: Where did you put them?  
- Marshall: I don’t know where they all were.  
- Q3: Seventeen analysts?  
- Marshall: No, no, no. There were more secretaries and so on. All I know is the number.  I don’t know, I’d have to look at it. See, the office when we came over here to the  Pentagon was initially five people, then six, and it kept creeping up to probably  around 12, 13. Brown gave us an authorization of 17 people. And then it sort of  went down like the defense budget.  
- Q5: I still feel very strongly that the larger theme there is that it never became an empire, never got to 50 or 100 or something like that, which means you just can’t  do anything like what went on.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q2: In fact, the interesting thing is that it got smaller. It’s actually not a surprise that  organizations get bigger. What’s interesting is it got smaller, and stayed around  [indistinct].  Q5: Those are real anomalies compared to almost all institutions or organizations.  
- Q2: They get big and worthless, you know. But it does help to explain how you’re  able to do nine assessments in four years, I mean, having 17 people helps you do  that.  
- Q5: Well, I’m willing to at least throw on the table as a conjecture that in another 50  years if somebody goes back into the history of this, a lot of the military-technical  revolution stuff that’s gone on since the Cold War, there will be a very important  chapter on all this. Now, we may not get it as a superpower and follow in the  steps of Great Britain into obscurity. But at least a few people sat around and said,  “There are other choices. Use your heads.” But we may screw it up anyway.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q5: And it’s very hard to figure out where that’s all going to lead or not lead.  
- Marshall: Right, right. OK.  
- Q3: It was good.  
- Q2: And the next time is the ‘80s?  
- Marshall: Yeah

* * *

### Endnotes    
1 Eds: This chapter and the outline are excerpted from an interview conducted on 8 April 1994.  The portions of the interview relevant to the Nixon and Ford Administrations can be found  in Chapter 3. See also transcripts of interviews of Marshall by Alfred Goldberg and Maurice  Matloff (Historical Office, Office of the Secretary of Defense), 1 June 1992, 18–23; 15 June  1992; 29 June 1992, 1–3.  2 Eds: Jimmy Carter, “United States Foreign Policy Remarks to People of Other Nations on  Assuming Office” (20 January 1977), American Presidency Project, www.presidency.ucsb.edu/  documents/united-states-foreign-policy-remarks-people-other-nations-assuming-office.  
3 Eds: Presidential Directive 18, “U.S. National Strategy,” (24 August 1977), Jimmy Carter Presidential Library, www.jimmycarterlibrary.gov/assets/documents/directives/pd18.pdf  
4 Eds: Jimmy Carter, “Inaugural Address” (20 January 1977) American Presidency Project, www.  presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/inaugural-address-0  
5 Eds: Presidential Directive 7, “SALT Negotiations,” (23 March 1977), Jimmy Carter Presidential Library, www.jimmycarterlibrary.gov/assets/documents/directives/pd07.pdf  
6 Eds: Gordon S. Barrass, The Great Cold War: A Journey Through the Hall of Mirrors (Stanford:  Stanford University Press, 2009), 206–11.  7 Eds: Edward C. Keefer, Harold Brown and the Imperatives of Foreign Policy, 1977-1981, Cold  War Foreign Policy Series, Special Study 8 (Washington: Historical Office, Office of the Secretary of Defense, 2017), 8–10.  
8 Eds: Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, “Military Strategy and Force Posture Review  Final Report,” Attachment to Presidential Review Memorandum 10, “Comprehensive Net  Assessment and Military Force Posture Review” (18 February 1977) Jimmy Carter Presidential  Library, www.jimmycarterlibrary.gov/assets/documents/memorandums/prm10.pdf  
9 Eds: Frank Leith Jones, Blowtorch: Robert Komer, Vietnam, and American Cold War Strategy  (Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 2013), 223–33.  
10 Eds: Edward C. Keefer, Harold Brown: Offsetting the Soviet Military Challenge, 1977-1981,  Secretaries of Defense Historical Series, Vol. 9 (Washington: Historical Office, Office of the  Secretary of Defense, 2017), 466–72.  
11 Eds: Presidential Directive 12, “U.S. Policy in Korea,” (5 May 1977), Jimmy Carter Presidential  Library, www.jimmycarterlibrary.gov/assets/documents/directives/pd12.pdf  
12 Eds: Keefer, Harold Brown and the Imperatives of Foreign Policy, 14–17.  
13 Eds: Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, “Military Strategy and Force Posture Review Final  Report.”  
14 Eds: Keefer, Harold Brown: Offsetting the Soviet Military Challenge, 395–405.  
15 Eds: Keefer, Harold Brown: Offsetting the Soviet Military Challenge, 322–327.  
16 Report to the Congress on U.S. and Soviet Command, Control, and Communications, 1977; Report  to the Congress on U.S. and Soviet Command, Control, and Communications, 15 January 1978.  
17 Welander reports listed in the collection of the Defense Technical Information Center: Soviet  Navy Declaratory Doctrine for Theater Nuclear Warfare, DNA 4434T (McLean: BDM Corp.,  30 Sep 1977) [ADA 058363]; Assessment of Soviet Navy Doctrine for Theater Nuclear Warfare—  Phase I (U), DNA 4122F (McLean: BDM Corp., 7 Oct 1977), SECRET//FORMERLY  RESTRICTED DATA [ADC 012703]; Assessment of Soviet Navy Doctrine for Theater Nuclear  Warfare—Phase I (Sanitized), DNA 4122FSAN (McLean: BDM Corp., 7 Oct 1977) [ADA  955364]; Guidelines for the Red Theater Command (U), DNA 5229F (McLean: BDM Corp., 1  Mar 1980), SECRET//Controlled [ADC 956006].  
18 In April 1989, CIA and DIA estimated the Soviet defense budget to be about 15 to 17 percent  of GNP. In July 1990, the CIA gave the same estimate. Joint Economic Committee, Allocation  of Resources in the Soviet Union and China, Part 14, 101st Cong., 1st sess. (Washington: GPO,  1990), 60; Joint Economic Committee, Allocation of Resources in the Soviet Union and China,  Part 15, 101st Cong., 2nd sess. (Washington: GPO, 1991), 170.  
19 Andrew W. Marshall, “Commentary,” in Joint Economic Committee, Gorbachev’s Economic Plans, Vol. l, 100th Cong., 1st sess. (Washington: GPO, 1987), 481–484; Andrew W. Marshall,  remarks at 11 June 1987 seminar of the International Security Studies Program of the Wilson  Center, in Security Digest #20, Jul/Aug 1987; David F. Epstein, “The Economic Cost of Soviet  Security and Empire,” in Henry S. Rowen and Charles Wolf, Jr., eds., The Impoverished Superpower: Perestroika and the Soviet Military Burden (San Francisco: JCS Press, 1990), 127–154.  
20 “When measured according to a definition of defense activities roughly comparable to that  used in the U.S., the Soviet defense effort absorbs some 11–12 percent of Soviet GNP. When  the calculation is based on the broader definition of defense, the share increases to about 12–13  percent. The new estimate of the share of defense in the Soviet GNP is almost twice as high as  the 6–8 percent previously estimated.” Prepared statement of George Bush, DCI, 24 May 1976,  in Joint Economic Committee, Allocation of Resources in the Soviet Union and China-1976, Part  2, 94th Cong., 2nd sess. (Washington: GPO, 1976), 24.  
21 Marshall, “Commentary,” 483.  
22 Alexander R. Alexiev and S. Enders Wimbush, “The Ethnic Factor in the Soviet Armed  Forces,” and Edmund Brunner, Jr., “Soviet Demographic Trends and the Ethnic Composition  of Draft-Age Males, 1980-1995,” in Alexiev and Wimbush, eds., Ethnic Minorities in the Red  Army: Asset or Liability? (Boulder: Westview Press, 1988).  
23 Alexiev and Wimbush, “The Ethnic Factor in the Soviet Armed Forces,” 143–150.  
24 Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC-10, Jimmy Carter to Vice President; Secretary of  State; Secretary of Defense; Director, Office of Management and Budget; Director, Arms  Control and Disarmament Agency; Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; Director of Central Intelligence; U.S. Representative to the United Nations, subj: Comprehensive Net Assessment  and Military Force Posture Review, 18 Feb 1977 (SECRET; Declassified 6 Jan 1992) [PRM/  NSC-10, Presidential Review Memorandum (PRM), Box 1, Records of the National Security  Council, Record Group 273, National Archives]. The NSC study, “Comprehensive Net Assessment,” Jul 1977 has not been declassified (Telecon with James Yancey, Jimmy Carter Library).  Unclassified discussions of the study can be found in Memo, Zbigniew Brzezinski to Secretary  of State; Secretary of Defense; Director, Office of Management and Budget; Director, Arms  Control and Disarmament Agency; Director of Central Intelligence, subj: SCC Meeting on  PRM-10, July 7, 1977, 25 Jul 1977 (SECRET; Declassified 29 Apr 1994) [Declassified Documents Collection, 1995/0598]; Zbigniew Brzezinski, Power and Principle: Memoirs of the National Security Adviser, 1977-1981 (New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 1983), 177; Samuel P.  Huntington, American Military Strategy, Policy Paper in International Affairs No. 28 (Berkeley:  Institute of International Studies, University of California, Berkeley, 1986), 28–29; Hedrick  Smith, “Carter Study Takes More Hopeful View of Strategy of U.S.,” New York Times, 8 Jul  1977, Al. A sanitized version of the DoD study has been released. See PRM/NSC-10 Military  Strategy and Force Posture Review Final Report, Jun 1977 (TOP SECRET; Sanitized 13 Aug  1993) [Jimmy Carter Library].  
25 Remarks by Secretary of Defense Harold Brown at the Naval War College, 20 Aug 1980,  Defense Department Office of Public Affairs; Harold Brown in Senate Foreign Relations  Committee, Nuclear War Strategy, 96th Cong., 2nd sess. (Washington: GPO, 1981); Walter  Slocombe, “The Countervailing Strategy,” International Security, 5, no. 4 (Spring 1981): 18–27;  Brzezinski, Power and Principle: Memoirs of the National Security Advisor, 1977-1981, 454–459;  Leon Sloss and Marc Dean Millot, “U.S.” Strategy in Evolution,” Strategic Review 12, no. 1  (Winter 1984): 19–28. 