## Introduction ##

The election of Ronald Reagan exemplified a shift toward a more muscular  American national security policy toward the Soviet Union. The shift began in the  last year of the Carter Administration with the issuance of Presidential Directive 59  calling for a new “Countervailing Strategy”: if the U.S. couldn’t win a war with the  Soviets, then at least the Soviets would not be able to win either. As the directive  stated, “(I)f deterrence fails initially, we must be capable of fighting successfully so  that the adversary would not achieve his war aims and would suffer costs that are  unacceptable…”2  President Reagan took that concept a step further in National Security Decision  Directive 13. “Should nuclear attack nonetheless occur, the United States and its  Allies must prevail,” he believed, not “countervail.”3 Reagan’s theory of the Cold  War was simple: “we win, they lose.”4 His administration’s plans for modernizing  strategic nuclear and conventional forces were intended to accomplish that goal.  Reagan’s 1983 Strategic Defense Initiative added a new dimension to the competition with the Soviet Union. While brandishing the stick of a military buildup,  however, Reagan also proposed dramatically reducing strategic and intermediate  range nuclear forces, both of which later resulted in arms control treaties with the  Soviet Union.  The NATO allies had agreed to a major long-term military modernization program  in 1979 that complemented the U.S. buildup. In 1981, the U.S. Army rolled out the  AirLand Battle concept for fighting and winning a war in Central Europe, and by  1984 it became NATO doctrine as well. For its part, the U.S. Navy signed out a new,  aggressive Maritime Strategy in 1984 intended to persuade the Soviets that, in  the event of war, they would not be able to disrupt easily U.S. convoys reinforcing  Europe nor be confident of the survivability of their ballistic missile submarine  force.  The Soviets, meanwhile, were bogged down in Afghanistan after their 1979  invasion, and U.S-supplied Stinger missiles to the mujahideen contributed to the  eventual failure and withdrawal of the Red Army ten years later. The aging Soviet  leadership was in turmoil when Leonid Brezhnev died in 1982, Yuri Andropov died  in 1984, and Konstantin Chernenko died in 1985. The frequent changes contributed to the weakening Soviet hold on Eastern Europe. Soviet leaders were unable to deal effectively with rising national expectations for increased freedoms, as  exemplified by the 1981 formation of the social labor movement Solidarity in  Poland, which successfully negotiated increasing rights.  China during this period continued the economic reform initiatives instituted by  Deng Xiaoping, which called for constrained military spending and greater investment in the economy. In 1979, the United States had recognized the People’s  Republic of China (replacing Taiwan), and economic ties between the two countries  began to grow. Consequently, China did not figure prominently in U.S. defense  planning, although Congressional pressures meant that U.S. arms sales to Taiwan  continued, as well as other less visible means of support.  In the Middle East, the Iraqi invasion of Iran in 1980 led to nearly ten years of  war between those two countries, which the U.S. observed carefully but took no  action. Because both Iraq and Iran were hostile to Israel, the lengthy war offered a  respite from conventional threats to the major U.S. ally in the region. A 1981 Israeli  air attack destroying Iraq’s nuclear reactor at Osirak pushed any nuclear threats  to Israel from that country much further into the future. Israel’s 1982 invasion of  Lebanon was intended to punish the Syrian-supported Palestinian Liberation  Organization for multiple attacks over the years and push it back from the border;  and while it achieved the immediate, near-term tactical goals, it did not produce a  long-term solution. 

## Outline for 26 July 1994 Talk  
[Note: Italicized items were not discussed during the interview.]  

### 1981–1984 Themes  
1. Analysis of Soviet weaknesses  
    — [Discussions with Soviet specialists]  
        • Shlapentokh/Pipes  
        • Birman  
        • Jim Billington/stories  
        • Peter Reddaway 
        • Vlad Treml  
    — ASW/Maritime Strategy —> Iklé/Adm. Small/Weinberger  
    — Long-term competition ideas/cost-imposing  
        • Studies—Chip Pickett, George Pugh, Reckmeyer  
        • Section inserted in Defense Planning Guidance/Iklé—first one (fall ‘81/  spring ‘82)−Impact/Iklé statement at meeting with labor representatives  
    — ‘84 Roche/AWM paper for Fortier  
    — Estimate of Soviet military burden (Wolf “cost of empire”/failure of CIA effort)  
    — Weinberger rejection of Soviet weaknesses  
2. CIA in Net Assessment  
    — Casey/Weinberger agreement  
        • Share Blue data  
        • Joint assessments  
            −‘82 Strategic Balance assessment/Rowen, Larry Gershwin, Charlie Pease,  AWM  
            −Meeting with Weinberger: {…}, B-2, ASW  
3. Assessments  
    — Asia/Rosen  
    — Power Projection  
    — Northern Flank  
    — NATO/Warsaw Pact  
    — Investment Balance  
4. Restart of Israeli talks  
    — Perle/Iklé OK  
    — Trip/Osirak attack/washout  
    — Briefing of Bud McFarlane—>strategic dialogue—State/DoD/Joint Staff  transition to planning  
5. Start of Defense Policy Board—experiment/Sy Weiss  
    — Soviet weaknesses  
    — Warsaw Pact cracks/John Vogt  
6. Start of Summer Studies—Los Angeles/Dennis Ross  
7. Negotiations with Israel post-‘82 war/Sharon/Weinberger reaction/undermined by  Secord/Feckless support of Bing West  
8. Context/Paul Wolfowitz/Jim Roche/Dennis Ross at State/Gene Durbin my deputy  — Space?  
9. Change in orientation of office due to Weinberger’s lack of interest 

## 1981–1984  
- Marshall: I made some notes and they’re organized more along kind of themes or  areas in this period. The first one is this analysis of Soviet weakness. That was one  of the major things I was working on. A second one is the Central Intelligence  Agency’s involvement in net assessment, because there was a period of collaboration with them. Then I thought I’d review several of the assessments that were  written in this period. Then there was the abortive restart of the Israeli talks that  took place in this period. There’s the start-up of the Defense Policy Board; the start  of Summer Studies [in 1985], and there was an episode of negotiation with the  Israelis over the post-‘82 war data.  Another thing to talk about is the gradual change in the orientation of the office,  which was driven, in part, by Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger’s kind of  total lack of interest in anything. There’s one other thing which I hadn’t put down  in my notes, which was an effort to continue with this development of the idea of  strategic planning that was pursued during this time. That’s really, in some ways,  part of the analysis of Soviet weakness.  Let me get back to this matter of the analysis of Soviet weakness. When the  Reagan Administration started, it coincided with a growing feeling on my part  that the Soviets really were in a lot of trouble. Now, that had started back, in a  small way, in the very late ‘70s, with an increasing sense that Soviet military expenditures were being very much underestimated by the CIA in all kinds of ways.  One way was that they were simply leaving out a lot of Soviet activities that were  relevant to their military, but weren’t reflected in army units or people wearing  uniforms and so on.  A particular thing that was of that sort was in the whole naval area. The Soviet navy  never acquired all of the oilers and other support ships, but the whole merchant  marine was designed to convert in wartime to support functions. Yet none of that  was ever included in any of the CIA estimates. I had written something in ‘74 or ‘75  pointing a lot of this out—they never did anything about it. I don’t know whether  it was in the late ‘70s that I made still one more effort to get them to do something,  and they didn’t do a very good job. Some ridiculous small addition was added. So  I finally got Charlie Wolf started on some of this, although his part was the other  part of it. It had to do with the cost of empire, which is another part of it.5  
- Q3: You got John Jederlinic, as I recall, to go out and look at some Soviet merchant  ships.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right. And there was a Russian naval architect, an emigre—but that  probably was in the early ‘80s—who came and told this story about the design of  the support ships for the fishing fleet. This guy had worked in one of the Leningrad yards, at kind of a design bureau there, and the fishing ministry had come  to them asking for a set of refueling ships to support the worldwide operation of  the fishing fleet. And they’d come up with a preferred design for the ship and the  number of ships. When the fishing fleet people put it through the administrative  mechanism, it ended up in the hands of the Navy, who came back with a counter-proposal in which they doubled the total capacity and came up with three  different ship designs, a mix for the whole thing, and that was the program they  actually went ahead with.6  And you could never get these Agency people to reflect any of that.7 Now, subsequently, all of this looks very plausible. But the Agency’s performance was absolutely abysmal in all of this. The things that made a big impact on me were, first,  there was this clear underestimate of the defense expenditures and defense-related expenditures. Then, it was only really probably in 1980 or ‘81, ‘82, that it  became increasingly clear to me that the estimates of the Soviet gross national  product were too big, in addition.8 So that the total effect of these two errors was  far more dramatic. It became credible to begin to think that about 25, 35 percent  of the GNP was really going into the military and military-related things.9  That things were bad in the Soviet Union, I think, came first from Igor Birman, who  appeared in the late ‘70s, and certainly had the view that things were bad. I remember also a few talks with Vladimir Bukovsky, and his views of things. Then Richard  Pipes [Director of East European and Soviet Affairs for the National Security  Council, 1981–82] brought Vladimir Shlapentokh to my attention, probably in ‘81,  and urged that I support him, and so I did that. Also, about the same time, I had  a meeting with Peter Reddaway [Professor at the London School of Economics],  and he talked about, essentially, the despair, demoralization of the people quite  high up in the Soviet establishment. This was based a lot on a set of interviews  that Reddaway had with the son of a very high-level official. And what it reflected was the conversation around his father’s dinner table among very high-level  officials about the state of things, and a conviction that they were never going to  be able to match the West. They had once thought that they could, but then they  realized they couldn’t. The reasons were, on the one hand, the inadequacy of the  Russians in the population. The “materiel” they were given couldn’t be compared  to Germans or Swiss or so on. And there was also a sense that the whole system  was nutty, including the people above them.  
- Q3: Was this the son of Roald Sagdeyev, or was that independent?  
- Marshall: No, no. I don’t know who it was. No, it was not Sagdeyev’s son. Now,  Shlapentokh told me that when he left Russia, he sold a dacha that he had to  Sagdeyev. And they met at the dacha to close the deal and so on. Supposedly, according to Shlapentokh, Sagdeyev said to him—this would have been ‘79—that,  “In the past we could always find resources to meet anything that the U.S. did, but  now [the Soviets] had come to a stage where that was impossible. Any new, really  big challenge would be impossible [to meet].”  
- Q4: This was generally, or as it applies to the military?  
- Marshall: I don’t know how directly military, but it was just a sense that, “We’re  stretched to the limit. We just can’t mount any big programs.”  
- Q4: Were these the key things that influenced you to conclude that the Soviet GNP  was overstated?  
- Marshall: I guess the thing that convinced me most was, initially, not so much that  I had a good idea that the thing was dramatically smaller, that it was probably overestimated to some degree, but the main thing was that they were just in a lot  of economic trouble, that they were just stretched to the limit and were going to  have trouble.  
- Q2: Did you have Murray Feshbach looking at some demographic things around  this time, too?  
- Marshall: That had started earlier. As I’d mentioned in an earlier meeting, the  Feshbach stuff had raised real questions about the whole demographic situation.  So when he left the government, I had him do this work on the health area, because  it seemed to me that one of the things that they were clearly underinvesting in  was health care. And that, therefore, in the longer run, the consequences of that  were going to be so pressing that they would have to begin to invest more, and  that, therefore, that would be a competing requirement for investment on their  part that would compete with the military eventually. So I was interested in that.  I had also started the stuff that Enders Wimbush and the people at RAND were  doing on trying to understand the impact of the changing composition of the  conscription cohort, the fact that rapidly a larger and larger portion would be  coming from the Asian ethnics. 10  The other person, I think, that had a big impact on my beliefs about it all was Jim  Billington, who had started talking in the middle ‘70s about the religious revival  that he saw in Russia, and the decline of the official doctrine’s hold on people. He  also told me of a discussion he’d had with a quite high-level Party official about  conversations that were taking place—again, this probably was around ‘82, ‘83—  about their concern about developments.  
- Q3: The Soviet GNP wasn’t as big as many thought. In addition, the military was  bigger than usual for the Soviet Union. I remember that you were mentioning this  economist, who sort of in the late ‘50s, early ‘60s was talking about how centrally  planned economies probably are not as good as everybody at the time in the U.S.  was cracking them up to be. What was his name?  
- Marshall: Warren Nutter.  
- Q3: And you said that he was kind of downgraded…  
- Marshall: “Downgraded?” It’s worse than that. He was kind of exiled. He could not  get a position at a really major university and ended up at the University of Virginia. And he actually served in the [Defense Department in the] first Nixon Administration as Assistant Secretary for Policy Planning in ISA [International Security  Affairs]. He and I were graduate students together at the University of Chicago. In  fact, he was Frank Knight’s last major PhD student.  And he was made to seem like a kind of right-wing, conservative nut by these  people, which he definitely was not. As I’ve said on other occasions, I would see it  as a sign of a return to some intellectual health of this field if people could stand  up and say Warren Nutter was right. If you read what he wrote, the tone was more  questioning, Why should we believe that these societies are going over the long  term to grow at a significantly faster rate than market economies? And he did a  lot of statistical work and so on.11
- Q5: What about somebody like [Friedrich] Hayek in all this? Was he just sort of  ignored through this whole period?  
- Marshall: He was far less ignored, and I don’t really think of him as having played a  big role. In fact, I’m unaware exactly what he was writing and saying during that  period.  
- Q3: He was writing more about the political pathologies of the socialist system, The  Road to Serfdom. Was Nutter sort of how you got started on this idea that, well,  this conventional view of the Soviet economy just really isn’t right and it’s worth  talking to lots and lots of people to find out how it might be screwed up?  
- Marshall: No. I talked with him, but we talked mainly about, I think, the defense  budget underestimates. He’d also spent some time at CIA in, I believe, the middlethrough-late ‘50s [1952–53], and then went away and did this work for the National Bureau of Economic Research on these questions.12 And he published this book  in the late ‘60s, I think [The Strange World of Ivan Ivanov, 1969].13 He’d published a  couple of articles.  
- Q4: I’m interested if you will talk, take this one notch deeper: Andy 
- Marshall’s sort of  intellectual process. That is, you seemed, basically, to find individuals, sometimes  outliers, and if they say things which seem to fit in an informational sense with  what might be going on, then you begin to push studies along to try to probe  and investigate.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q4: You also remarked that you let people walk in the office who are conventional,  straight-line and talk stuff that you don’t believe is the case. You say, “Thank you  very much,” and you don’t talk to them anymore. So what’s your mechanism for  finding what the hell’s going on in the world?  
- Q3: What’s the filter?  
- Marshall: I’m not sure I can articulate it very well. I certainly have had this view, much  like Nutter, that it’s hard to think that the Soviet economy was going to grow that  rapidly over the longer term. Some of that went back, really, to the ‘50s at RAND.  Here were all these guys at RAND who were studying the Soviet economy, and I  thought what they did was very unimpressive. Certainly when Joseph Loftus and  I were doing all that work for Project Sovoy we never could get anything out of  these guys that was of any use, of any sort whatever. And also-this sounds maybe  primitive—but you can do rough checks. Compound rates of growth are just very  impressive over any length of time, and the kind of things that people were saying  about the rates of growth in the Soviet Union didn’t jibe with assumptions you had  to make, crude assumptions, about the relative size of, say, U.S. and Russian GNP  in the ‘40s, early ‘50s. And over time, you just had to get more and more skeptical  that these rates of growth are consistent with other information. Because if they’re  growing at that rate, they are going to be a lot bigger than you perceive them to be.  
- Q3: Right. Either they had to be very small then or very big now.  
- Marshall: That’s right. So there was that. I suppose also that by the time some of  the emigres started showing up in the late ‘70s and early ‘80s, I’d already lost any confidence in the CIA numbers. Of course, the CIA can’t, as I mentioned in another  connection, be singled out. It was the whole of the American enterprise set up to  study this. Except for a few people who didn’t agree, it was kind of 95 percent of  the effort in this country, in academia and the CIA, was agreed about these things.  
- Q8: There’s a retrospective paper about the economics profession in the ‘50s, written  by Anne Krueger, who was the chief economist at the World Bank, saying that a  strong, dominant wisdom in the ‘50s was that the Soviets have got it right, basically. 14 And the so-called “neo-orthodox turn” doesn’t really happen until the ‘70s.  
- Marshall: That’s right.  
- Q8: Is Frank Knight known for this? You mentioned that he was at Chicago, he was  one of your professors. Was he for a [indistinct] neo-orthodox economist?  
- Marshall: Oh yes.  
- Q8: Did he suffer?  
- Marshall: No, not at Chicago.  
- Q8: He already had tenure, he somehow got tenure before…  
- Marshall: He was one of the outstanding people at Chicago and had been there  for a long time. And yet he was not a person who was doctrinaire in the way that  Milton Friedman is. He was a much broader person than somebody like Friedman.  
- Q8: Did he ever visit you here in the Pentagon?  
- Marshall: No. He was the most prestigious person in the [Chicago] Economics  Department in the late ‘40s, probably throughout the ‘40s.  Earlier I was talking about Billington, the story he told me of having dinner with this  high-level Party official. According to this source, there was a great argument  going on within the Party about the state of affairs in the Soviet Union. The striking  thing to me, though, was that there was a substantial group of people whose view  was that the only solution to their problem was the restoration of the church. My  feeling was that if there’s a wide group of people in the Communist Party who sees  the solution as being the restoration of the Orthodox Church, they are in trouble. He  also told me other interesting stories about the private collections of religious art  and so on that high Party people had, and that there was a separate institute run by  some professor and supported by the Party that specialized in the restoration of all  these works of art. So I think—it’s hard to place it exactly—but certainly by ‘82, ‘83, I  was very convinced they were in a lot of trouble. And I suppose that then there also  was the beginning of the notion that we had seriously overestimated the GNP.  Those are two separate issues, in a way, but the stronger was the fact that they  were in very significant economic trouble, and that had a lot of effect on my  thinking about the situation. And so my conviction continued through the ‘80s to  grow on that. So that’s one thing that was going on.  Another dimension of this weakness was more specifically military. I talked last  time about the stuff that James Roche and I had done on the antisubmarine warfare problem and its effects. One of the first things I did when the new people for  the Reagan Administration came aboard was to talk to Fred Iklé [Under Secretary of Defense for Policy] about this. By that time the Navy was undertaking some  very interesting war-gaming and analysis, all done under Admiral William Small,  who was then the Vice Chief of Naval Operations.  Ron St. Martin was involved in a number of these things. A special briefing was  arranged for Weinberger to apprise him of this opportunity. All of that, therefore, continued and, in fact, was picked up and reinforced when Admiral James  Watkins became the CNO.15 He picked up on this in a very major way, which I  think, given most people’s view of Watkins, they may be surprised. But he was one  of the most innovative guys in this respect. And he organized an effort that Bill  Manthorpe was very much involved in, which led to something called the “Blue  Book,” which was a whole set of things that could be done—a deception program  and some other things. So that continued, and through Small I was kept informed  on what the Navy was doing.  
- Q4: Would you speculate on why, say, the Navy got to this thing faster than, say, the  Army or the Air Force? Was it because, for example, they spend more time among  the Soviets?  
- Marshall: Well, there was that, and they had a very special intelligence window  into things. Also, it was probably that the kind of diagnosis that Roche and I and  maybe a few others began to see in them, beginning in the middle and late ‘70s,  was convincing for a variety of reasons. And it was such a big shift, and suggested  such high leverage that we had, that it was very compelling to people. There was  nothing quite comparable, I think, in other areas. So it represented a really big  shift in beliefs on the part of people once they saw this.  Another kind of thing that was going on in this general area of exploiting Soviet  weakness was this return to, or further development of these ideas on long-term  competition. It’s about this time that I started some studies. I had three study efforts on this “cost-imposing strategy.” Chip Pickett did one, George Pugh directed  a set of studies, and Bill Reckmeyer picked up on that.When do you date that?16  
- Q4: The study was delivered in the summer of 1983, so we started the work in the  winter, January of ‘83.17 And it was very difficult to get people to work on it, to get  people to take the right focus. Getting them to really think about the issues the  way that you were trying to think about them.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q8: Was one of the studies done by Booz-Allen and it said on the cover “Soviet  Vulnerabilities” or something like that? It was in ‘84? Something that I was always  stunned with, your office, whoever, on this whole issue. I can’t remember who  did it. It was either Booz-Allen or BDM. And it was a conference you had hosted  on Soviet vulnerabilities; that was in the title. And there were color tabs for each  topic or vulnerability.  
- Marshall: Yeah, that was BDM, I think, that did that.  
- Q8: Same period? ‘83? Or ‘84?  
- Marshall: No, I think all those things happened about the same time. I think probably around ‘82, ‘83, something like that.
- Q8: It went beyond imposing costs. It was laying out a blueprint almost of what  could be done.  
- Marshall: That’s related, really, to one of the things that happened as part of this  start-up of the Defense Policy Board. I’d actually forgotten that had happened,  that BDM thing.  
- Q2: Was that Phillip Karber?  
- Marshall: Yeah, he ran that. But the most systematic thing, in some respects, is  probably a series of things done by George Pugh, I think. They were the most  elaborated things.18  
- Q2: On cost-imposing?  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q2: And where was he?  
- Marshall: He ran his own company.  
- Q2: “DSCA” or one of those?  
- Marshall: Yes. “DS-something” [DSA—Decision-Science Applications, Inc.]  
- Q2: Did he do that cruise missile one, as a cost-imposing strategy? Did he do that?  
- Marshall: I think so [Cruise Missile Cost-Imposing Effectiveness: A Case Study of the  Impact of the U.S. Air Launched Cruise Missile (ALCM) on Soviet Air Defense Costs].  So there were a series of studies that were done. This began probably in early  ‘82 or something like that, maybe even late ‘81. Some of that was a response to  something that happened in either late ‘81 or early ‘82, and that was the Administration putting together its first defense policy guidance [Defense Guidance].  I don’t know who Iklé had really write that, but he had me look at it, and asked  whether there was any other thing that ought to be in it. I said, “Well, there is this  idea of exploiting Soviet weaknesses.” And he said, “Oh yes, right. That’s a reasonable idea. So why don’t you write a section?” So I wrote about two pages that said  we’re engaged in this long-term competition with the Soviets, they have resource  constraints and so on, and, therefore, in your programs that you propose, there  should be a discussion of how this program contributes to or directly exploits  Soviet weaknesses. In particular, there’s this idea of cost-imposing strategies and,  if possible, estimates ought to be made of the costs that are imposed. That was  in there [the guidance] the first time, and then the next time it was largely just  reproduced, but then it began to be negotiated away by the bureaucracy as just  too hard, too difficult, with people essentially saying, “We don’t know how to do  that,” and it gradually became neutered.19 One interesting aspect of that was that  when Frank Carlucci left as Deputy Secretary [of Defense], and was replaced by  this businessman—I forget his name…“Norton” or something like that. But at any  rate, one of the interesting things was that he happened to read this thing and  said, “That’s a terrific idea! What have people actually done about it?” And he sent  out a memorandum to each of the Services asking them, “What have you done  about this?”20  
- Q3: Thayer, wasn’t it? Thayer. Paul Thayer. 
- Marshall: Thayer, yeah right. And we got back these ridiculous answers from all the  Services. From the Navy: “We do this all the time,” and a bunch of examples that  were all baloney, and not really reporting on the relevant things that it was really  doing.21 I think the Army never responded, and the Air Force came back with  some feeble set of answers.22  
- Q2: They did this all again when we did competitive strategies.  
- Marshall: That’s right. Same thing.  
- Q5: The one that’s particularly puzzling is the Navy, because they actually had something to report.  
- Marshall: That’s right, yeah. They didn’t understand it in those terms, whatever. In  fact, I’ve been trying to get a copy of this first DPG [Defense Guidance].  One other thing to report on about this general theme and topic is that fairly  early in the Administration, Carlucci asked me to come see him. This was probably  March of ‘82, although it might have been earlier than that [Apr ‘81]. Anyway, the  Administration was being beaten up a bit in the Congress and elsewhere for not  having a strategy, which in retrospect, is a little crazy. The criticism was that its  defense policy was just a big budget, you know, spend more on everything, and  that there wasn’t any strategy.  
- Q8: In this case you have to conclude that Congress was correct.  
- Marshall: Yes, in that respect, probably. And Carlucci wanted to know, what would  people accept as a strategy? What would a strategy really be? And if they ought  have one, what could they do? So I wrote him two memos, which I do have, and  I sent him a lot of the stuff that had been done earlier on strategic planning and  about strategy. And I told him, “This is what a strategy might be and here are  some examples of it.” And I sent him some papers. I remember one thing, a paper  that Roche and I had written for [Secretary of Defense] Donald Rumsfeld that  focused on the Navy. I sent him things of that sort.  Then I also wrote him a suggestion about how you might go about putting  together some group or process for developing such things. Nothing ever came  of any of that, I mean, the one thing that came of it was the creation of this thing  that Karber headed over at the National Defense University, where…  
- Q2: SCDC, Strategic Concepts Development Center.  
- Marshall: Yeah…where Weinberger kind of added on to something that— I guess,  it was General David Jones [Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff] who was starting a couple of things over there. One was to look at mobilization, and I forget the  second one, some sort of gaming activity.  
- Q2: There were three of them. The first one was the Strategic Concepts Development Center that Karber headed up.  
- Marshall: Yeah, but that was the add-on, that was the thing that…  
- Q2: Then the Mobilization Concepts Development Center.  
- Marshall: Right, right.
- Q2: And they had the war-gaming center [Wargaming and Simulation Center]. And  then, eventually, those three became the Institute for National Strategic Studies.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right. But initially, Jones had the two and three of that, and  Weinberger then added this other thing. And that was the whole response to the  strategy notion. Then the way they actually used Karber and company was not to  really focus on these strategic kind of issues at all.  The one other thing worth mentioning is that Weinberger totally rejected the  notion of Soviet weakness, despite this book that’s out called Victory [by Peter  Schweizer], which claims that there was this comprehensive strategy, at least for  some members of the Reagan Administration.23 I think in Reagan’s case that might  well be true, in William Casey’s [Director of Central Intelligence] case it might well  be true, but was definitely not, as far as I can tell, true in the case of Weinberger…  
- Q8: Or George Shultz [Secretary of State].  
- Marshall: …or Shultz, right.  
- Q2: Did you ever talk to Bob Osgood? Osgood had a Policy Planning staff over there  [at State]. He was a former Dean, Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International  Studies. Initially, Paul Wolfowitz went over there, didn’t he?  
- Marshall: Paul was over there.  
- Q2: Alexander Haig [Secretary of State] brought him over.  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q2: So that was later on when Osgood was over there. But Osgood had this view  about they had these weaknesses and we should try to roll them back, but that  would have been later on in the Reagan years.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q8: Weinberger’s congressional testimony on the Soviet Union frequently used the  word “relentless.” And there’s no notion of weakness, or vulnerability, or these people are spread too thin. [Indistinct] They were not in the congressional presentations at all.  
- Marshall: Oh no. And I know that a little later on—I think it really would be in the  early part of the second Reagan Administration—we had a briefing to Weinberger of stuff that we had been doing, and he was very much focused on this  underestimate of the Soviet defense expenditures and, therefore, they have  this burden and it’s a problem and so on—which he dismissed entirely. He had  various arguments about why it couldn’t be true because their labor costs were so  low and they hardly paid their servicemen anything. So there was no sense there  of any of this. I don’t know the exact timing of that. It might have been at the very  end of this period that we’re talking about, up through the end of ‘84, or it may  have been just after it.  On the other hand, early on in the administration, probably late ‘81, early ‘82, I  remember a meeting where there was a substantial delegation of labor leaders  who came, a meeting in the Secretary’s conference room, and Fred Iklé gave a talk,  which was very much of this. Not so much stressing their weakness, pointing to that and that they don’t have unlimited resources, but talking about, on the one  hand, we’re building up and it’s going to create demands on them to increase some  of their expenditures to counter what we’re doing; on the other hand, we’re instituting new measures to prevent access to technology, and therefore, it makes it  more costly for them to respond to us and so on. And there was this whole sense  of a strategy that he was articulating. But most of the time I saw no evidence of it.  Although Weinberger was quite enthusiastic about the ASW [Eds: anti-submarine  warfare] things the Navy was doing, and he certainly was not in favor of being  friendly or helpful to the Soviets, and if you could do them in or do something  that caused them a lot of troubles, that was fine.24 But he did not have a sense,  I think, of the economics of the situation very clear in his mind. In fact, very few  people did, as far as I’m concerned. The thing that I’m struck by now is the emergence of all these people who supposedly had these views. There’s an increasing  number who saw the light early, I guess.  Let’s get on to topic two, the CIA and net assessment. An interesting aspect of this  period was that early on, Casey and Weinberger had a meeting. 25 In the Harold  Brown period, the effort of the CIA to get into the net assessment business had  been strongly rebuffed.26 But this [the Casey-Weinberger meeting] was an attempt  at an agreement to stop the conflict between the CIA and Defense. There was an  agreement laid down that Defense was going to supply more Blue data, and there  were to be these jointly done net assessments, rather than the Agency going  ahead and doing its own.27 Given that Harry Rowen had become the head of the  National Intelligence Council that worked very well. Not very many were done.  In fact, only one was really done, which was a really big effort, on the strategic  balance. And that succeeded very well, as I say, because Harry was there and I was  here. Charlie Pease [a Navy Captain in Net Assessment] and Lawrence Gershwin  [National Intelligence Officer for Strategic Forces], who had just gone over there  [to the CIA], got together, and it’s probably the most satisfactory assessment of  the strategic balance that we ever did. We didn’t really do very much after that,  and the ones before were not adequate in lots of ways. Even then, there were  things that couldn’t be in it because they were too classified.  So I had a short meeting with Weinberger, and I had a meeting with Iklé, to  remind them that, here was this assessment, which on the whole I thought was  good, but that there were three areas where we hadn’t been able to adequately  account for things that were largely a plus on our side. So that the real balance  was probably more favorable than the one expressed in this thing. One of these  was the B-2, that was going to be coming along—stealth; [one was] this ASW  advantage and all the implications it had, the fact that very likely in the early  phases of any conflict, during any conventional phase, we would attrit a lot of the  nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines; and a third thing, which I still don’t  think I can talk about, but which was going on.  The other kind of balances that were being done in the period included Asia.28  It’s the most comprehensive Asian thing that we’ve done. We haven’t really done  one since then. We’re working our way to maybe do another one. We did a power  projection balance which was pretty good.Early in the period, we finished off this Northern Flank assessment, which reflected some of the stuff that we had done  before.  
- Q2: Who did these? Who did power projection? Northern Flank?  
- Marshall: The Flank one was done by Jerry Burke.  Q2: And who did power projection?  Q3: I think Steve Rosen did that. But there was an older Jim Roche Power Projection  Balance that Rosen sort of updated and Dennis Ross “blessed” it.  Q8: Who wrote all the parts about how to reorganize the U.S. government to do  better at power projection? It’s in the recommendation section at the end of it.  Q3: There were parts of it, because we’d talked about how, you know, we didn’t  think about power projection as a separate category. Lots of parts of the American military do that. But Dennis was certainly [indistinct].  
- Q8: That was a very rich assessment, actually. It ought to have had some impact.  
- Marshall: Yeah. Well, Dennis…  
- Q3: Well, as I recall, the thing was that some of the earlier projections about Soviet  power projection capabilities having [indistinct].  
- Marshall: Yeah. But Dennis, in the early part, was over with Paul Wolfowitz [at State].  He came back in ‘83, ‘84 and became my deputy and then he went away to academia. He returned to the National Security Council staff in ‘86 or something.  Then there was the NATO-Warsaw Pact thing at that period that Barry Watts was  involved in.  
- Q5: Yeah. And Dave Andre got it. John Hines did the Soviet assessment stuff. Eventually Jeff McKitrick inherited it.  
- Marshall: And then there was the investment balance stuff that we were doing, that  David Epstein did. And those are the main things that were going on in that period.  But by the end of that time, because Weinberger really wasn’t that interested and  Iklé kept adding other kinds of things for us to do, we began to limit the number  of assessments that we were doing. And in the second Reagan Administration,  the NATO-Warsaw Pact thing was carried out under Jeff McKitrick, and we continued to look at power projection, but I don’t know that we completed anything.  There weren’t too many assessments that were really finished in the second  Administration.  
- Q2: Probably the Middle East one under Ned Cabaniss.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right. But we’ll get to that, and the other diversions, later. Going  back to the beginning of this Administration, there was an attempt to restart the  strategic discussions with Israel.  
- Q4: Before you switch out of that, what happens to the CIA role in net assessment?  Is it just basically on the horizon for a couple of years and then dissipates?  
- Marshall: We did the one big thing, and then there was an update, I think the year  or so afterwards. Then, they were so resource-demanding on both sides that nobody really wanted to do more. Everybody was so busy. So it was there, but  nothing more was ever done. We’ve done a couple of smaller efforts which never  quite came to completion, to do further updating of the strategic assessment, but  it’s just petered out.  
- Q3: Before we move on here, my memory is that of one of the things which took up  a lot of time and money in the office was the RAND Strategy Assessment Center  effort, and the effort, in general, to improve the modeling capabilities of the  American government with regard to nuclear war.  
- Marshall: Yes, yes. That’s true, I’d forgotten.  
- Q3: On which we spent a lot of money, we spent a lot of time.  
- Marshall: A lot of time, particularly initially.  
- Q2: We had a whole series of workshops, and walked through the whole thing on  the European model with all kinds of people reviewing those things.  
- Marshall: Of course, the whole thing had this history. There was this Defense  Science Board study of ‘78. And then there was consideration of what to do about  the recommendation to try to develop a more war-gaming style of analysis. It was  all tied, initially, to this sense that our analysis of strategic warfare was…[gap for  tape change]…on missile exchanges and so on. In fact…  
- Q3: It was a strictly economic model for optimum values, which had nothing to do  with the way people would really fight the war.  
- Marshall: Well, every possible defect imaginable. If you want to look at an area that is  intellectually awful, it’s that area. It’s as though it got frozen in a middle ‘50s framework or something. It has a whole bunch of problems. Anyway, it’s an area of analysis somebody ought to just go and do a history of and the accumulating defects.  So the idea was that a more war-gaming style of analysis would be better.29 First,  it would put this strategic exchange in the context of an ongoing war, which was  probably the way in which it would happen. So it would be simply a part of a war.  With the standard analyses of strategic nuclear war it’s as though you just had taken them [U.S. and Soviet nuclear forces] off to one side and it’s like a weight-lifting  contest or something like that happening on the sidelines of a football game.  Then, it had this focus so exclusively on the missile exchange, as contrasted with  the bombers, let alone the submarines, which were simply treated as invulnerable—everybody kept theirs. We knew from this other work that some of the submarines might well be sunk. This possibility was never treated, and so the whole  interrelationship of the ASW picture with the strategic balance was never looked  at in any of these models.  
- Q3: I remember [indistinct] it kind of totally ignored the logic of the Soviet campaign  in the northern area which was designed to increase their submarines’ survival.  
- Marshall: Yes, right.  Then Brown agreed that something should be done. So probably in ‘80 [1979], we  let an initial contract. I think we put out a request for proposals. We got somewhere from five to eight. We winnowed it down to two, and then we gave money to both SAIC and to RAND.30 And we also created a board of people who would  make the decision. After a year’s work, there was a briefing by each one of them,  and a choice was made. And the [indistinct] was very much in full tilt during these  early years of the Reagan Administration.  Let me interject one other thing which I have a note on, which I had mentioned.  This is something that was kept very quiet at the time, and nothing has been said  about very much since. In, I think it was ‘84, Don Fortier [Senior Director for Policy  Development on the NSC staff] approached Roche and I to talk about something  that the people on the NSC were going to do. The idea was that they wanted to  have a more comprehensive, strategic approach, strategy for the second term.31  He came and talked with Jim and me. So Jim and I wrote a paper for him and sent  it over. I don’t know whether Rosen [was working for Fortier at the time] saw it?  The paper was very much along this line of exploiting our advantages and their  weaknesses. I have a copy of it someplace [“Stressing Soviet Defense Planning”].  
- Q3: And there was finally a meeting with you and Admiral John Poindexter [deputy  to the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs]?  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q3: You, Jim, Don, Poindexter, and Rosen, as I recall.  
- Marshall: Yes, right. Robert McFarlane [Assistant to the President for National  Security Affairs] was also at this…  
- Q3: Maybe there was another meeting with McFarlane?  
- Marshall: [Indistinct] meeting with McFarlane. Which took place, I don’t know, early  in, probably, ‘85.  
- Q2: And what came out of that?  
- Marshall: Nothing. I guess Fortier had asked other people for advice as well. I think  Albert Wohlstetter wrote something, or did he?  
- Q3: Yeah. Bill Odom. Sam Huntington.32  
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q3: Good idea, but nothing happened 33  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q2: When did Fortier pass away?  
- Q3: Summer of ‘86, August of ‘86.  
- Q2: Was that a reason nothing happened, or was it dead before that?  
- Q3: It was dead before that. As I recall, in the meeting with Poindexter, Jim Roche  finished, after all the presentation had been made, and all the steps that had been  prepared [indistinct], Jim turns to Poindexter and says, “John, we’ve brought you  [some ideas]. You’ve gotta do something now.”  
- Q2: Was Phil Dur up there, too?  
- Q3: Part of the time. He left the summer of ‘84 to go off to Lebanon for something.
- Q8: The context of this debate, I should add, in ‘85 was the so-called “Reagan Doctrine” had been announced by the press. But the NSC staff, and State, and Defense  were denying that there was a Reagan Doctrine. And part of it was coming from  Don Fortier himself, who sympathized with some aspects of it, but I guess McFarlane and others kept saying, “Well, there’s not enough consistency among these  different issues to call it a doctrine.” And so… I notice even now in memoirs about  the Reagan Administration, people on one side want there to have been a Reagan  Doctrine, but others say there never was.  
- Q3: It turned out that we didn’t have a National Security Decision Directive on  Afghanistan. So we decided to write one.34 Essentially [it said], we should have a  cost-imposing strategy for our activities against the Soviets in Afghanistan. And  in order to do that, we had to be able to measure how the Soviets assessed their  own costs in Afghanistan, figure out what kind of losses in Afghanistan meant the  most to them, and then skew our effort to driving up their indices or their measures of the costs that they were suffering. We might be measuring it all wrong.  They might not care about infantry casualties. They might care about officer casualties, or they might care about technology compromises. And that was written  into the NSDD and that became part of— That’s the only example—  
- Q8: The whole topic of Afghanistan… It’s not clear how much you [Marshall] were  personally involved in it, but lots of the work became very operational nitty-gritty  stuff, both [indistinct] Steve Rosen and Michael Pillsbury, and others had copies  of things you had produced and were using them in the persuasive part of it. And  the opposition was just enormous, not only to the NSDD framework, but later on  to what could or should be done. And it got into the whole issue of how strong is  the Soviet Union. And there was a “fear” on the part of every single member of the  Joint Chiefs of Staff, that if you provoke these guys—  
- Marshall: Yes, right.  
- Q8: —they’re going to invade Pakistan, and we cannot defend Pakistan under any  circumstances, so it’s just foolish for you to be toying with this monster. There  would be images like this created in the meetings—“Toying with the monster,”  and things like that. The whole notion of weakness was not…  
- Q3: And the flip side would be that there were people that just had these two contradictory notions at the same time. First of all, you would so hurt them that they  would go mad and nuke you. On the other hand, they were so strong that there  was no way that you could hurt them enough in Afghanistan to stop them from  doing whatever they wanted to do. So it was both…  
- Q8: This was coming out of Robert Gates’s [Deputy Director for Intelligence] office,  too. The DI under Gates, remember, had a big Afghan task force. They were  writing these papers that they would give to us at meetings, along the lines that,  “nothing you could do—”  
- Marshall: Yes, right.  
- Q8: —will do any more than cause the death of a few more mujahedin. Our heroes  will die if you do anything more.
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q8: So the thinking about Soviet strategy was…  
- Marshall: Well, right. I should preempt something that we can talk about at the  next meeting. I remember when the competitive strategies thing came out I had  a discussion with the then-head of the Air Force [General Lew Allen], who I knew,  and his argument was, “Well, yes, this is a good idea in a way, but, first, whatever  we do, the Soviets will match us.” [But] there’s no sense in his argument. The Soviets have resource constraints; there was not just an infinite supply of resources  available to them. And [his] second thing was, “We’re so inconsistent that if we  start something we’ll weaken and fall off, and they’ll keep going, and then we’ll  be in worse shape than if you’d never done anything.”  
- Q8: Does he [Eds: Guthe] have a research assistant or someone who can dig up a  lot of quotes? Because these were… I’ve noticed in the memoir literature now,  everyone is simply ignoring the quotes of the mid-‘80s about the power of the  Soviet juggernaut, not by any professors, but by heads of the Air Force, Army,  Navy, Weinberger himself.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q8: And it’s just being laughed away now: “Oh, we never thought that. We always  knew we were just three years away from the Berlin Wall being cracked open.”  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q3: The only other thing on the Reagan Doctrine, was, following on from Andy’s  studies of Soviet power projection, Fortier ,was saying, “OK, how can we drive up  Soviet costs of power projection?” Because they were active in Angola, and doing  all that other stuff. And I recall {…}  
- Q8: Are you going to do different assessments at different times [during this project]? Because relevant to this, also, is the ADCAP [advanced capability] torpedo.  The whole issue of Weinberger and strategy, in some sense, came down at one  point to one of your…I think it was the Navy balance, wasn’t it? I remember reading it from… It was an official balance…  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q8: You’re leaving out the effort you made, you had to get Will Taft [Deputy Secretary  of Defense] to…Taft said, “Why don’t you…”—it was Dennis Ross’s idea, actually—  ”Why don’t you get together every single formal assessment Marshall has done,  put all the recommendations together, and check which ones have been implemented and which ones haven’t, and then report to Fred Iklé, [Undersecretary of  Defense for Policy] and Taft about what more needs to be done, and I, Will Taft,  will sort of oversee this process.” And Marshall drafted one of those memorandums to all Services, everybody in the Pentagon, describing this. Then he gave  it to Fred And remember Fred? “No!”—he didn’t want to do that. But we started  doing it anyway, informally, to see what had been done.  And one of the most vivid things was your Naval Balance, said, at the very, very  end, it had like 12, a certain number of recommendations, and one of them was  the ADCAP torpedo. That for reinforcements to NATO, if you can get the probability-of-kill way up against Soviet submarines that were going to otherwise choke off  U.S. supplies—  
- Marshall: Yeah, yeah.  
- Q8: —it made a big difference in whether or not Europe survived long enough to  continue resupply. And all of a sudden the ADCAP torpedo, which had a Pk [probability of kill] [that] was very, very high. You know, most torpedoes were considerably lower…Well, the Senate Armed Services Committee staff had put the ADCAP  torpedo as— They’d zeroed it out that year, because there was testimony from  Litton that it wasn’t ready yet or something like that. And here was a concrete  example of where you’d think the Secretary of Defense would have said, “NATO,  Europe—they’re important. This is a strategy against a known Soviet strategy  to sink our resupply effort. This is very much needed. It’s crucial.” When asked,  [“Has] Weinberger or anybody, even the Navy, singled out the ADCAP torpedo?”  [the SASC staff] said, “No, there’s not even any testimony.” It was just buried away  in the munitions request from the Navy. So that got plussed up, once it was  explained what the importance of it was. But that was an example of what would  have happened if Taft had gone through with the—  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q8: —[indistinct] what he thought was right, and said, “No, I really think Andy  Marshall’s recommendations ought to be inventoried and we should see what’s  been done and what’s not been done.” This little anecdote, are you going to have  a session on this? Because this went into “Reagan II,” later on. Your operating environment, here in the Building.  
- Marshall: Yeah. Well, we can try to talk about some of these things.  
- Q2: I think on that one I agree, with Fred [Iklé].  Marshall: On the whole, we haven’t been in the recommending business. We’ve sort  of….  
- Q2: Diagnosis.  
- Q8: [Indistinct] your recommendations in some of these.  
- Marshall: Yeah, there are.  
- Q8: Your name could be stenciled on every ADCAP torpedo. The chairman at Litton  should be in here thanking you.  
- Marshall: I see. Yes, right, right.  Let me get back to the restart of the Israeli talks. When Richard Perle [Assistant  Secretary of Defense for International Security Policy] and Iklé came on board  and—Perle in particular knew about the fact that we’d had those earlier discussions  with the Israelis—asked about them, I told him about their demise in the last year of  the Carter Administration. Perle and Iklé wanted to restart them. So I went over to  Israel to make arrangements and talk to them about starting the talks. But then the  thing got squashed by Weinberger, because a few days after I left Israel, the Israelis  attacked [on 7 Jun 1981] the Iraqi [Osirak] nuclear reactor. Then later, I talked with  Bud McFarlane, who I guess during the first year or so of the Reagan Administration was an ambassador-at-large [Counselor] in the State Department. And it was then  they were transiting to this new form of these talks with the Israelis, in which State  and, really, the Joint Staff, I think, were the main participants, because it was the  direction which the Israelis wanted to go, in any case, of having these talks as real  planning sessions and so on about various things. 35  A next thing to talk about is the start of the Defense Policy Board. I guess fairly  soon after Iklé was on board, Sy Weiss went to him with the idea of establishing  a Defense Policy Board modeled after the CNO Executive Panel. Fred decided to  go ahead with it, or to do an experiment with it. And there was a period when, in  some way, we probably were breaking the law by having these meetings and it  wasn’t fully established, all the procedures hadn’t been gone through.  
- Q2: I’m sure no laws were broken.  
- Marshall: In any case, it was run out of my office at this point. I think it probably  started in ‘83.  
- Q3: I think it was earlier, ‘82.  
- Marshall: It might have been. I suppose so, I don’t know. The reason I place it in  ‘83 is that I had the impression that from the beginning Harry Rowen had been a  member of it, and he spent the first two years of ‘81 and ‘82 out at the …  
- Q2: National Intelligence Council [NIC].  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q3: He came over while he was still head of the NIC. And Paul Wolfowitz was part of  it when he was still at Policy Planning in the State Department.  
- Marshall: Yeah. One of the topics early on was another dimension of the Soviet  weakness theme that began to be explored, particularly the possibility that in  Europe, that the Warsaw Pact might have some serious internal problems. And  retired General John Vogt was hired to do a study and exploration of that.  
- Q2: Is this the one that was locked up, the Vogt study—  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q2: —was locked up. And all the copies collected.  
- Q3: Rosen also wrote a paper for you on the character of mutinies in the Warsaw  Pact that might be induced.36  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q3: No one was allowed to take any copies of that paper anywhere, either.  
- Marshall: Right. There must be some copies of the Vogt study around here yet, I  don’t know.  
- Q2: Who was it that was really against the Vogt study? Was that Weinberger?  
- Marshall: No, I don’t think Weinberger was against it. I don’t know where he really  was [on that] [indistinct].  
- Q2: There was a lot of opposition to that study. I mean, it was like don’t…Somebody  said this study is not to be circulated 
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q3: But then SCDC went and sort of tried to replicate a similar kind of analysis about  how to get the East European nations to defect in time of war. I remember being  sent over to listen to their brief.  
- Q2: A Jeff Simon study?  
- Q3: I can’t remember who did it.  
- Q2: But I remember the Vogt study. It was classified TS, and when I came here, I  think you said, “Read the Vogt study.” And there’s only one copy, and it’s locked  in a vault, and all the rest have been destroyed. It was the only copy left of the  study, which also was supposed to have been destroyed, too, but wasn’t. Do you  remember who was opposed to that or why?  
- Marshall: I know that Vogt went and talked with General John Vessey [Chairman of the  Joint Chiefs of Staff] and some of these other people about it and got some response.  It was a very mixed reaction, no doubt about that. And there was some discussion  with Bill Casey [Director, CIA] about intelligence activities, operations that might  have to be taken. And again, there was no enthusiasm for doing that. I mean Casey  probably was interested, but the establishment as a whole was rather uninterested.  Another thing to mention from this period is that probably the first of the Summer  Studies was done, during, I think, ‘84.  
- Q4: Wait a minute. Before you get out of [indistinct] the Policy Board. Are you going  to come back to the Defense Policy Board in the subsequent discussions and talk  about how it has grown and changed, and whether you think, in reality, it has  been useful?  
- Marshall: We can do that, but I think probably we’ll do it next time. But I’ll say a  few words now. I think that the original notion that Sy Weiss pushed made it not  very useful. It was the idea that here is this set of wiser people who would listen  to things and then make judgments and give advice, but not really do any work.  I think that was not a good way of functioning. I don’t know how it’s going to  function now, but it was evolving toward something a bit more like the Defense  Science Board. Not quite, but it is more helpful where there are task forces, people  really do some sort of work, and it’s not just off-the-top-of-the-head, seat-of-thepants reactions.  
- Q3: John Deutch [Deputy Secretary of Defense at the time of the talk] was involved  in it in the early days. And I remember he was pretty disgusted with the whole  business. That may affect his attitude.  
- Q2: Who was on it the first year? You said Rowen, Paul [Wolfowitz]…  
- Q3: Paul, John Deutch, Albert Wohlstetter, Fred Hoffman. I remember Sy Weiss  sitting Fred Hoffman down, and he said, “We’ll let you come to the meetings, but  you can’t vote the way Albert does all the time.” Sort of like Outer Mongolia and  the Soviet Union [both being in] in the [United Nations] General Assembly. Fred  Hoffman, being such a sweet guy, just sat there and said, “Right.”  
- Marshall: Bob Long [Retired Navy Admiral] was on it. 
- Q3: John Deutch, Larry Silberman…  
- Marshall: Oh, and Charles Herzfeld [former Director, Advanced Research Project  Agency]. OK, the Summer Studies. The first Summer Study was run out of RDA in  L.A. in ‘85.  
- Q3: And then in ‘87 we did the Monterey business for the Discriminate Deterrence…  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  OK, another item: This negotiation with the Israelis about the “lessons learned”  activities that were to use their experience, any materiel they had gotten out of  the ‘82 War, turned into a fiasco. Dennis Ross and I and some other people went  over [in Nov 1982] to try to negotiate something with them.37 Anyway, I say this  just for the humor of it. We negotiated this long agreement. Weinberger thought  there should be just one page, some minimal kind of agreement. And they wanted this long, elaborate document, giving this or that access to the results that we  would have and so on. So we negotiated it and came to sort of an agreement that  was enough to take back, although I was doubtful that the people back here were  going to agree to all of it. Then I guess Ariel Sharon [Minister of Defense] because  of his own political interest decided to get some publicity out of the fact that this  agreement had been reached. [gap for tape change]  
- Q2: You were on TV? In Israel?  
- Marshall: In Israel. Just at this meeting. And it was leaked to the papers later and so  on. At any rate, I started off the meeting by telling him that we’d signed this thing,  but very likely people back in Washington were not going to agree. In particular,  I mentioned that they [the Israelis] had insisted on, throughout this document,  the name or the phrase that they had used to designate this war—something  like “Peace in Galilee” [Operation Peace for Galilee] or something, I forget what  it was—and I had been instructed that we would not sign any document of this  sort. So I told him that. I said, “Look, I’m taking this back. We’ve gotten as far as  we can with this thing. But I just want to tell you that very likely we’re not going  to sign any document that has this in it.” He then went off for about a 20-minute  tirade on, “‘We don’t tell you what to name your wars,” and went on and on and  on. And then at the end of it all, he asked my help in getting Weinberger to ship  off another $200 million that had been held up for something.  
- Q3: Before we move on…You had this sort of discussions with the Israelis, but you  also had a set of ongoing discussions with the French and the Germans.  
- Marshall: Yes, right.  
- Q3: The only reason I mention that is that my memory of the sessions that I went  to, a lot of the stuff that now gets referred to as the “military-technical revolution”  and the “revolution in military affairs” was presented in one guise or another, both  by the Germans and the French, and a little bit by us.  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q3: This was also following on some of the “lessons learned” from these Middle Eastern  wars, but also some of the early work on the impact of precision guided munitions.
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q3: Again, I wouldn’t [indistinct] seems like a lot of your interest in what we now  call the “revolution in military affairs” stems from this period, and you used that in  discussions with other governments. Is that right?  
- Marshall: Well, I would locate my interest in this really from the Russian writings  which we became aware of—their internal, still-secret writings—in the late ‘70s,  which became more public in the early ‘80s, ‘83 or so, in particular, and also the  analysis of exercises that we were aware of. In, say, ‘79, they were already beginning to look at how to counter reconnaissance-strike complexes and so on. So we  were interested in that set of ideas increasingly through that period. And then at  the time of the Iklé-Wohlstetter thing [the Commission on Integrated Long-Term  Strategy],which began in the summer of ‘86, we did this assessment of the next 20  years in which that was one of the major themes. 38  Just to leap ahead: It’s kind of symptomatic of this denial of Soviet weakness that Iklé  as late as ‘88 required that Charlie Wolf and I use, in effect, the CIA estimates of Soviet  GNP as the base case in our projections, which was not what we believed, and we  put in the variants.39 If it had been left to us, we would have put a much lower estimate of Soviet GNP as the base case and the OA [CIA estimates] as a nutty variant.  
- Q8: Did you hit Iklé on that, too?  
- Marshall: He had two objections to things that we wanted to do. One was that we  wanted to put a little emphasis on AIDS as a problem…And secondly, any portrayal of the Soviets as weak or smaller as opponents was not to be highlighted.  But certainly by the middle ‘80s, I very much saw this as a major theme, and  certainly included it in the NATO-Warsaw Pact assessments that were done. And  I’m sure that we talked some about that with the French and the Germans and  others.  
- Q3: What sticks in my mind is that both general staff officers from the German army  and from the French army talked about their ideas about the nature of battlefield  tactics—  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q3: —and operational behavior in a battlefield in which information was available  to everybody, where everybody else was, and the importance of stealth on the  battlefield, of tactics which mingled your forces with those of the enemy so they  couldn’t be sorted out. I was just kind of struck by—  
- Marshall: Yeah, right. The French in particular…  
- Q3: Colonel [indistinct] was a very impressive guy.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right. The discussions with the French, which did start in this period,  began in ‘81. The approach had been made to Robert Komer [Under Secretary of  Defense for Policy] in the middle of ‘80, and Komer had assigned us to undertake  those. The first meeting, I think, was in Paris in the spring of ‘81.  
- Q8: And the French—I misunderstood—the French did or didn’t have the idea that  the Soviets are weak?
- Q3: They may or may not. I don’t recall them discussing that specifically, but they  did— We, the French and American delegations, seemed to be engaged in a dialogue about the nature of what we now call the “military-technical revolution.”  
- Marshall: Yeah, that’s true.  
- Q3: But what was the purpose of the discussions with the French? Was it just to…  
- Marshall: It came on the French initiative, through the attaché, who they approached wanting to create another channel for discussion of particular problems, sharing of information, and so on.  
- Q2: I think the French were doing that because of the Israeli talks?  
- Marshall: No, I don’t think so. I don’t think so. I don’t think they particularly knew  about the Israeli talks prior to this.  Well, I don’t really have anything much more [to say]. Maybe some of you have…  
- Q3: Well, how about the changes in the orientation of the office? You didn’t kind of  take the office as a topic.  
- Marshall: Well, as I say, we came into this particular period from what we were doing in the years with Brown, during which things were going very well, and so we  had a bunch of things, and so in the first few years of the Reagan Administration  we were finishing off various things and continuing on. But then, it was, I thought,  very clear that Weinberger just didn’t have any interest. And so the number of  assessments, I think, began to trickle off, and there were other things that Iklé  had us involved in. It got worse in ‘85, with the competitive strategies thing being  added on. And there was also the start up, then, of the Wohlstetter commission  [Commission on Integrated Long-Term Strategy].  But before that, there had been something which I had forgotten entirely about,  which was a big set of activities which had to do with this effort to look at the  strategic forces—the whole set of games that Charlie Pease did.  
- Q2: Oh, the NSDG [Nuclear Strategy Development Group] games?  
- Marshall: Yeah, the NSDG effort, which was an initiative that Fred Iklé started, I suppose, given that this was probably in ‘83, and just about the time of the Strategic  Defense Initiative. It wasn’t triggered by the SDI, but it sort of became part of it.  The whole idea was that we have this elaborate Master Plan [Nuclear Weapons  Employment and Acquisition Master Plan] for our forces that runs through the  early ‘80s, or up to ‘85—I forget the exact dates of it now.  There was this Master Plan for fixing up the strategic forces, and Iklé thought we  needed to look at the period beyond there, because, first, the target system was  changing, becoming much harder. As a result of the change in targeting policy  we’ve already touched on, they began looking for the leadership things. We find  all this whole new range of hardened targets. You look at what’s happening on  the silo upgrades, changes and so on. In other words, just a whole set of things  are happening on the Soviet side so the target system…  
- Q2: Started going to mobiles.
- Marshall: Yeah…is changing. Then along comes SDI, or the possibility of missile  defenses, and the questions arises, “Will you want to shift to a defense-dominated strategy? How should you be thinking about all of this?” So he wanted to get  started with the studies to look at the period beyond the Master Plan. So we ran  a lot of the activities for him. One, there was this set of games. But there were  other studies that were done that we were responsible for. There was an analysis  working group that I chaired for him.  All of these activities began to displace the assessments, and we were down, I  think, to continuing— We were doing the NATO-Warsaw Pact by the end. We were  doing the Investment Balance. I think we continued to try to do a few things in power  projection. But we were narrowed down quite a bit, and only began to expand back  into this net assessment business when the Bush Administration came to power.  
- Q4: At this point in time, you’ve been in Washington a little over 10 years. You’ve  been in [the Office of the Secretary of Defense] for about 10 years.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q4: What are you thinking about in terms of going back to California? Is this analysis  effort succeeding or failing? What were your sentiments?  
- Q3: You were pretty grumpy at the time as I recall.  
- Marshall: Yes. Right. I don’t remember exactly, but, yes, I think that’s right. And I was  probably thinking a lot more about going back to California.  
- Q2: Now, why do you think Weinberger never picked up on this Soviet weakness  stuff? He clearly was very interested in doing as much as he could do across the  board on defense spending to get forces up and everything to oppose them…  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q2: A big proponent of SDI. And in many ways, that’s just the culmination of the  whole cost-imposing thing. So, why not? Beyond political reasons. One could  understand why you wouldn’t want to give the political opposition any notion  at all that they could do less because the other guys were weak, as opposed to  doing more and driving them into the grave. If you said too much, “Aw, they’re  weak over there,” then everybody says, “Well hell, we can cut the budget then, if  they’re weak.” But setting that aside, was there some really fundamental problem?  He wanted to do all these things, but he didn’t have an objective? Is that….  
- Marshall: I don’t know. I don’t know how he felt about me. I saw him only two or  three times or so. So I don’t know what he thought. But I see no signs in the discussions that I know of, or heard anything about, that he had any understanding  of the economics of the situation. And obviously tactically bad. Whether, as this  book Victory alleges, he was part of an inner group that understood this all and  was pursuing this strategy…Maybe he kept it to himself. I don’t believe that, but  it’s possible.  
- Q8: On the pipeline issue, Weinberger totally was with hawks.  
- Marshall: Yeah, well so was Perle and everybody. There was a whole set of people  here that were very much against that.
- Q8: Was there anything in ‘84 about Weinberger giving the order to shut down the  Office of Net Assessment? Did you hear anything about how the Joint Staff was  going to create its own office of net assessment? And get public release rights for  every assessment wherever it would be done? That this office [ONA] would not  ever be allowed again to testify in public?  Q3: Yeah. There was gossip that the JCS wanted to take over the net assessment  function entirely.  Q2: It was more than gossip. They tried to get that under the Goldwater-Nichols  [Defense Reorganization Act of 1986).40  Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q2: They got it insinuated in some way in the Packard Commission [President’s  Blue Ribbon Commission on Defense Management],41 and then they tried to get  the language in Goldwater-Nichols structured in such a way that, well, they did  get it structured in such a way that they were given the charge by Congress for  conducting net assessments.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q2: And they tried to argue that they gave them sort of a higher moral authority  because theirs came from Congress, whereas this office’s only came from the Secretary of Defense. And so therefore, they should have the lead on doing all that. I  mean, this is looking forward to the next session.  
- Q8: I was told that by the special assistant to Weinberger in roughly May ‘84. When I  said I really wanted to go over there and work with Andy Marshall, she said, “Don’t  you know he’s being shut down? Weinberger has decided to shut down that  office.” I remember being quite startled. And as I remember, there were a number  of steps taken involving senators calling Weinberger, saying, “You shouldn’t do  that,” in June and July, I think it was, of ‘84. Phil Merrill [publisher of the Washingtonian magazine] also got into it. He was quite panicked by this concept. And  when given…When asked why, Weinberger’s special assistant said there are two  reasons. The office never does anything, number one. They never produce any  assessments. This is not her opinion; she’s reflecting what she’d heard discussed  around Weinberger. Number two, the Joint Staff—or a word like that, I don’t know  the exact…whether it was J-5 or JCS, or the Joint…the word “Joint” is in there—  was real angry about the way the assessments come out.  And looking back—this is not something that happened at the time—but  looking back, I think the Soviet weakness argument, perception, or whatever you  want to call it, brilliant analysis, was causing real political enemies to be formed,  that you cannot— This office was being misperceived as a liberal, sort of left-wing  operation. Because at the time, the Federation of American Scientists…there’s a  unit of public opinion in America at the time saying the Russians are weak, they  want peace, we should extend the hand of friendship. And some of Marshall’s  arguments were being scrambled with the American left-wing view, and therefore seen as mutiny or treasonous against Weinberger’s patriotic efforts to sell the  Services’ budgets on the Hill.
- Q3: Yeah. It sort of feeds back into the idea that by talking about Soviet vulnerabilities,  you sort of gave ammunition to the left wing in the United States. I think it came  back in what was one of Weinberger’s few marginalia on the Investment Balance,  which contains some idea, “Look, the Soviets have this big advantage over us in  invested military capital, but one response the United States might take would be  to undertake new military programs to render obsolete some portion of the Soviet military capital stock.” Which I believe Weinberger’s response to Mr. Marshall—  obviously he remembers better than I do—[was], “Is he one of those liberals who  thinks the Soviet military is full of obsolete equipment and therefore is no good?”  
- Q8: So that’s around here somewhere? That handwritten note is around here?  
- Q3: I think it was in marginalia on the short version that was sent up. David Epstein  perhaps knows something about that? So that’s the only concrete piece of evidence that I know of.  
- Q8: When Senator Orrin Hatch came over to see Weinberger about Pillsbury joining  the Defense Department, that was one of the topics, that is, his decision to shut  down…  
- Q3: [Indistinct] confined to Weinberger, because Andy, as always, had many adherents in the senior leadership of the military. And I don’t think the outcome of  the Balances that I was aware of annoyed— For example, remember that famous  occasion when we all went out to Pearl Harbor to brief Admiral William Crowe  [Commander in Chief, Pacific Command, 1983–1985] on the East Asia Balance? A  lot of people on Admiral Crowe’s staff didn’t like the Balance, but Admiral Crowe  looked at the thing and said, “Yeah, yeah, looks good. Count on Andy to come up  with something sensible,” you know. And Admiral Long [Crowe’s predecessor as  CINCPAC] was a fan of Andy’s. So I think Weinberger had one set of perceptions  and the senior leadership of the military was different.  
- Q8: I never got a name of an individual, general or admiral, who was sort of out to  abolish Net Assessment…Somehow this thing called “Joint Military [Net] Assessment”  …I lost track of it. The next thing I know people are coming to sit in offices, handing  people copies of this thing called “Joint Military [Net] Assessment,” JCS on the cover.  
- Marshall: Yeah, well that’s later.  
- Q2: That comes after Goldwater-Nichols and that’s their first thing. J-5 did something on it, and we have a whole process set up to do these things on it. Coordinated, Net Assessment Coordinating Committee we set up—  
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q2: —and all that in response to this. And, you know, J-5 tried to use that to capture  the flag, the whole net assessment flag. It was all pressure from the Hill, by the  way, for net assessments. This was just being written into legislation, “You will do  net assessment on this, you’ll do net assessment on that.” They use the phrase “net  assessment” in ways that this office doesn’t. So, you, “You’ll do a net assessment  on which way rivers flow, and why they do that,” things like that, I mean everything, partly because Tony Cordesman was over there. He was kind of writing  [that] everything had to have a net assessment to it. 
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q2: It’s his [Cordesman’s] way, I think, of bolstering the importance of the office. But  then there was this sense that these were becoming increasingly important and  demanded, etc. So the JCS thought they must be good and they didn’t want this  office doing it. So they wanted to capture the thing for themselves. The only general  officer I know—and again this is a feedback to Weinberger—Arnie Schlossberg, who  was the head of the Chief of Staff of the Army’s staff group as a colonel, and the  Chief was General John Wickham, and then Schlossberg got his first star and went  down to J-5, so he was involved in this kind of stuff, although I met him as a colonel.  He once pulled me aside at a conference up at Harvard, when, I think, he was the  deputy J-5, and said, “You know, you really ought to get out of that office because,  you know, Weinberger just doesn’t think very highly of it all [indistinct] Marshall.”  
- Q8: ‘85 this was?  
- Q2: Yeah, somewhere thereabouts.  
- Q3: Did he go to MacDill Air Force Base [Rapid Deployment Joint Task Force and  Central Command headquarters] after that?  
- Q2: Well, he got his second star and went off and did something else.  
- Q3: What was it, like RDJTF [Eds: Rapid Deployment Joint Task Force]?  
- Q2: Well no, it was CENTCOM.  
- Q8: One of the things that Senator Hatch said to Weinberger was about China. He  praised the Asia assessment; how the Senator knows about this, who knows?  Weinberger perked up—I was in the meeting—Weinberger perked up and he did  not seem to know that Net Assessment had said that there’s a big payoff if we do  things with China on [indistinct] used the term “imposing costs.” That’s why I wanted to underline the part in the assessment about the tremendous costs of doing  things in Siberia. There’s about ten pages in there—God knows how you dug all  that out—but it’s tractors and trucks, and building roads, and permafrost.  
- Q3: There were studies of oil exploration in Siberia and that was the basis for what  we had.  
- Q8: And Weinberger, of course, had just been to China for the first time in ‘83. We  hadn’t sold anything in terms of weapons yet. We did that in ‘86. Then they came…I  noticed in his memoirs, he really plays up his China trips and going to upgrade the  Chinese MiG-23s with American avionics and— He’s very proud of his China role.  
- Q2: That wasn’t a great idea.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q8: Through the second term and Bush and later comes more the Asia stuff, but the  seeds begin in this 1980 100-page-plus Asia assessment, which was not offensive,  I would think, to the Joint Staff, if they ever saw it. Of course, [indistinct] none of  your studies, apparently, so they really didn’t know what you were saying. They  would just know from conferences or meetings.  
- Marshall: No, we sent copies of that all over the place. 
- Q3: It was briefed to the CNO Executive Panel.  
- Q8: No, I mean all assessments. A J-5 colonel could not lay his hands on all of Mr.  Marshall’s assessments.  
- Marshall: No, no. I mean we send them there and they systematically destroy them.  They have no memory…  
- Q2: In fact, one of the first things they did when they tried to capture the net assessment flag was they wanted copies of all assessments.  
- Q3: One of the, I think, more successful stories was something which you didn’t talk  about at all, which is the whole effort to develop Soviet-style assessments—  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q3: —which I think actually was useful in itself, and also kind of caught on in the  larger community.  
- Marshall: Yeah, that’s right. That continued on through this period.  
- Q5: Which is progress. A lot of progress was made on that.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q3: Because it was something that you could— Remember [indistinct] had the very  intelligent idea from you about setting up schools to teach people how to do Soviet-style— So you could propagate it throughout the bureaucracy and it wasn’t  the exclusive possession of—  
- Marshall: Yeah, right. That’s true. I don’t know the timing of all that. It certainly was  continuing on during this period. And I remember—I guess I’d have to look at the  records—we had a number of meetings with people like Fritz Ermarth [National  Intelligence Officer for the USSR and Eastern Europe], and General William Odom  [Army Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence], and a guy from [the Defense Intelligence Agency]…  
- Q3: Gordon Negus.  
- Marshall: Right. And I forget when John Hines first came to the office. And Steve  Rosen came during this period.  
- Q2: And you had started the Foreign Systems Research Center at SAIC in Denver,  John Battilega and Judy Grange and Project Eager out there.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q2: In fact, they taught a week-long course on Soviet-style assessments. And you  got the intelligence community to actually start looking at that.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right. And Odom started to do stuff with the Army.  
- Q2: And actually started getting some information that, you know, was useful.  
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q5: The first balance in which that was really well laid out was the strategic net  assessment that you were talking about during this period.  
- Marshall: Yeah. It came out in ‘82, ‘83 [1983]. 
- Q5: Going back to these issues about how things were perceived outside the  office… I seem to remember initially on that NATO-Pact Balance that Dave Andre  began that we really got around to a clear understanding that their view of the  balance was really much more pessimistic than what we said, you know, in Soviet  Military Power, I mean. There were a lot of unhappy campers about that whole  story, although I think it was well-documented.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q3: You’re right. There were some very specific technical aspects of the strategic  nuclear balance where it was just clear that the Soviets analyzed damage probabilities in a completely different way than we did.  
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q3: In ways which sometimes made us look better. [gap for tape change]  
- Q5: It was difficult to get almost anything out of you on subjects like “what do you  think about the Soviet defense burden” back in ‘83, ‘84, ‘85. I just say that in the  sense that you’re much more open about this stuff the last few years, it seems to  me—  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q5: —than you ever were. And that, I think, has some consequences, from your  standpoint, for how clear messages maybe were communicated, even within the  office. Now, I assume you were completely forthcoming in private discussions,  you know, in appropriate…  
- Q2: When did the German talks start?  
- Marshall: They started back in the ‘70s. They were the first ones we started. Mainly  because this group was headed by this General [von Orr/von Knorr?]…who was  a close friend of Peter Haas [Deputy Director for Science and Technology, Defense  Nuclear Agency] and had come to me. So they started, I think, probably around  ‘77, ‘78, something in there. The first actual meeting, I forget, whether it took place  here or there. And they did some interesting things for that. And then the French  thing, as I say, started in ‘81. And we had this whole other set of discussions of a  different sort with the Israelis, beginning in ‘76. 

* * *

### Endnotes  

1 Eds: This chapter is based on an interview conducted 26 July 1994.  
2 Eds: Jimmy Carter, Nuclear Weapons Employment Policy, Presidential Directive 59, July 25,  1980, formerly Top Secret//Sensitive, partially declassified 8/20/96, 1.  
3 Eds: National Security Decision Directive 13, Nuclear Weapons Employment Policy, The  White House, Washington, October 19, 1981, formerly Top Secret//Sensitive, declassified  12/09/08, 1.  
4 Eds: Richard Allen, Interview for the Ronald Reagan Oral History Project, Miller Center,  University of Virginia, May 28, 2002, accessed March 8, 2013.  
5 Charles Wolf, Jr., K.C. Yeh, Edmund Brunner, Jr., Aaron Gurwitz, and Marilee Lawrence, The  Costs of the Soviet Empire, R-3073/1-NA (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Sep 1983); Charles  Wolf, Jr., Keith Crane, K.C. Yeh, Susan Anderson, and Ed Brunner, The Costs and Benefits of the  Soviet Empire, 1981-1983, R-3419-NA (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Aug 1986); Charles  Wolf, Jr., “The Costs and Benefits of the Soviet Empire,” in Henry S. Rowen and Charles  Wolf, Jr., eds., The Future of the Soviet Empire (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1987), 121–140.  
6 Andrew W. Marshall, “Commentary,” in Joint Economic Committee, Gorbachev’s Economic  Plans, Vol. I, 100th Cong., 1st sess. (Washington: GPO, 1987), 483.  
7 Ibid., 481–484; David F. Epstein, ‘The Economic Cost of Soviet Security and Empire,” in  Henry S. Rowen and Charles Wolf, Jr., eds., The Impoverished Superpower: Perestroika and the  Soviet Military Burden (San Francisco: Institute for Contemporary Studies, 1990), 127–154.  
8 For criticisms of CIA estimates of Soviet GNP, see Anders Åslund, “How Small ls Soviet National Income?” in The Impoverished Superpower: Perestroika and the Soviet Military Burden, 11–  50; Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Estimating the Size and Growth of the Soviet Economy,  101st Cong., 2nd sess. (Washington: GPO, 1991); Nicholas Eberstadt and Jonathan Tombes,  ‘The Soviet Economy: How Big?” The American Enterprise 1, no. 4 (Jul/Aug 1990): 76–80.  
9 “Commentary,” 484; Andrew W. Marshall, remarks at 11 Jun 1987 seminar of the International Security Studies Program of the Wilson Center, in Security Digest #20, Jul/Aug 87; ‘The  Economic Cost of Soviet Security and Empire,” 153.  
10 Alexander R. Alexiev and S. Enders Wimbush, ‘The Ethnic Factor in the Soviet Armed Forces,” and Edmund Brunner, Jr., “Soviet Demographic Trends and the Ethnic Composition of  Draft-Age Males, 1980-1995,” in Alexiev and Wimbush, eds., Ethnic Minorities in the Red  Army: Asset or Liability? (Boulder: Westview Press, 1988).  
11 G. Warren Nutter, Some Observations on Soviet Industrial Growth, Occasional Paper 55 (New  York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1957); G. Warren Nutter, Growth of Industrial  Production in the Soviet Union (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1962).  
12 See biographical sketch of Nutter in House Foreign Affairs Committee, Strategy and Science: Toward  a National Security; Policy for the 1970s, 91st Cong., 1st sess. (Washington: GPO, 1969), 241.  
13 G. Warren Nutter, The Strange World of Ivan Ivanov (New York: World Publishing Co., 1969),  121–132.  
14 Anne O. Krueger, Economists’ Changing Perceptions of Government (Kiel: Institut für Weltwirtschaft an der Universität Kiel, 1990).  
15 See statements by Watkins in Edgar Ulsamer, “Bobbing, Weaving, and Fighting Smart,” Air  Force Magazine 66, no. 8 (Aug 1983): 88–89, 91, 94; Richard Halloran, “Navy Trains to Battle  Soviet Submarines in Arctic,” New York Times, 19 May 1983, A17; Senate Armed Services  Committee, Department of Defense Authorization for Appropriations for Fiscal Year 1985, Part  8, 98th Cong., 2nd sess. (Washington: GPO, 1985), 3887–888, 3893; House Appropriations  Committee, Department of Defense Appropriations for 1986, Part 2, 99th Cong., 1st sess. (Washington: GPO, 1985), 927–928; “The Maritime Strategy,” in The Maritime Strategy, Supplement  to the U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings, Jan 1986, 7, 9, 11, 13, 14. See also Ronald O’Rourke,  Nuclear Escalation, Strategic Anti-Submarine Warfare, and the Navy’s Forward Maritime Strategy, Report No. 87-138F (Washington: Congressional Research Service, 27 Feb 1987), which  draws on official statements, including those of Watkins.
16 W. Reckmeyer, Cost-Imposing Strategy Development (Bethesda: Booz-Allen and Hamilton, 7  Feb 1983), For DoD Use Only [Available from Defense Technical Information Center, ADB  158346].  
17 Booz-Allen and Hamilton, Analysis of Alternative Techniques for Using Cost Imposing Strategies  in Defense Decision Making (U), DNA-001-82-C-0331, 21 Apr 1983, SECRET.  
18 Enhancement of the Efficiency of U.S. Military Programs Through the Application of “Cost-Imposing”  Strategies (U), DSA Report 485 (Arlington: Decision-Science Applications, 24 Jun 1983), SECRET (executive summary only); Cruise Missile Cost-Imposing Effectiveness: A Case Study of the  Impact of U.S. Air Launched Cruise missile (ALCM) on Soviet Air Defense Costs (U) (Arlington:  Decision-Science Applications, date?), SECRET; G.E. Pugh and R.R. Hibbard, Cost Imposing  Effectiveness of an Attack RPV: A Case Study of a Remotely Piloted Airframe for Ground Combat  Support, Partial Draft (includes summary of findings and conclusions only), DSA Report 521  (Arlington: Decision-Science Applications, Jan 1985).  
19 Memo, Caspar W. Weinberger to Secretaries of the Military Departments, Chairman of the  Joint Chiefs of Staff, Under Secretaries of Defense, Assistant Secretaries of Defense, General  Counsel, Assistants to the Secretary of Defense, Directors of Defense Agencies, Commandersin-Chief of Unified and Specified Commands, subj: FY 1983-87 Defense Guidance (U), 10 Jun  1981, with attachment, “Competing with the Soviet Union in Peacetime (U),” SECRET, 13;  Memo, Caspar W. Weinberger to Secretaries of the Military Departments, Chairman of the  Joint Chiefs of Staff, Under Secretaries of Defense, Assistant Secretaries of Defense, General  Counsel, Assistants to the Secretary of Defense, Directors of Defense Agencies, Commandersin-Chief of Unified and Specified Commands, subj: FY 1984-88 Defense Guidance (U), 22 Mar  1982, with attachments, “D. U.S. Strengths and Opportunities (U),” 5, and “F. Competing with  the Soviet Union in Peacetime (U),” SECRET, 24–26. See also Richard Halloran, “Pentagon  Draws Up First Strategy For Fighting a Long Nuclear War,” New York Times, 30 May 1982, 1.  
20 Memo, Paul Thayer to Secretaries of the Military Departments; Chairman, Joint Chiefs of  Staff, subj: U.S. Weapons Development Policy (U), 10 May 1983, CONFIDENTIAL.  
21 Memo, John Lehman to Deputy Secretary of Defense, subj: U.S. Weapons Development Policy (U) - Info Memorandum, 18 Jul 1983, SECRET.  
22 Memo, Verne Orr to Deputy Secretary of Defense, subj: U.S. Weapons Development Policy  (U) - Information Memorandum, 20 Jul 1983, SECRET/  
23 Peter Schweizer, Victory: The Reagan Administration’s Secret Strategy That Hastened the Collapse of  the Soviet Union (New York: The Atlantic Monthly Press, 1994).  
24 “I think that [attacking Soviet ballistic missile submarines in a conventional war] is a vital  part [of our strategy], that we should try to eliminate the Soviet means of warfare as quickly  as possible. You have with these submarines always the question as to precisely what they are  carrying at any given moment despite their capability. It certainly is an isolated part of the  strategy, of the way we would go about dealing with the situation that we hope to deter. One of  the ultimates you have to bear in mind is that the Soviets know we have this capability. It adds  to the discouragement to them to start it.” Weinberger, in Senate Armed Services Committee,  Department of Defense Authorization for Appropriations for Fiscal Year 1987, Part 1, 99th Cong.,  2nd sess. (Washington: GPO, 1986), 82.  “Our ASW capability has reinforced the Soviet navy’s defensive orientation, keeping them  close to their homeland in order to protect their ballistic missile submarine fleet. This limits  the Soviet navy’s threat to our sea lines of communications with our European and Asian allies  in the early period of war.” Caspar W. Weinberger, Department of Defense Annual Report to the  Congress for Fiscal Year 1987 (Washington: GPO, 1986), 86.  
25 According to Bobby Ray Inman, “Mr. Casey and I struck an agreement with Secretary Weinberger and Deputy Secretary Carlucci in the second week of the Reagan Administration that,  after the intelligence community had finished its national intelligence estimate on strategic  forces, the intelligence community and the Defense Department would sit down together  and prepare a net assessment.” Bobby R. Inman, “The Military Perspective,” in Thomas J.  Hirschfeld, ed., Intelligence and Arms Control: A Marriage of Convenience (Austin: Lyndon B.  Johnson School of Public Affairs, 1987), 55.
26 For Turner’s comments on net assessment, see Stansfield Turner, Secrecy and Democracy: The CIA  in Transition (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1985), 249–251.  
27 Memo, Frank C. Carlucci to Secretaries of the Military Departments, Chairman of the Joint  Chiefs of Staff, Under Secretaries of Defense (cc: Director, Net Assessment), subj: Preparation of Net Assessments and the Provisions of U.S. Force Data to the CIA (U), 12 Jun 1981;  Frank Carlucci to Director of Central Intelligence, subj: Selected Net Assessments, 19 Jul 88,  with attachment, Memo, Richard L. Armitage [to?], subj: Selected Net Assessments - Action  Memorandum, 14 Jul 1988.  
28 Ltr, Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger to Fred Iklé, 9 Sep 1983, SECRET with  attachments (no attachments) (mentions White House use of OSD/NA analysis of Asian military balance).  
29 A.W. Marshall, “A Program to Improve Analytic Methods related to Strategic Forces,” Policy  Sciences 15, no. 1 (Nov 1982): 47–50.  
30 J.J. Martin and Douglas C. Olin, “Improved Methods for Strategic Analysis,” and Marlie H.  Graubard and Carl H. Builder, “New Methods for Strategic Analysis: Automating the Wargame,” in Policy Sciences 15, no. 1 (Nov 1982): 51–69, 71–84.  
31 This planning effort is discussed in Robert C. McFarlane and Zofia Smardz, Special Trust (New  York: Cadell & Davies, 1994), 276–277, 285–289.  32 McFarlane lists the following individuals as among the participants in the planning effort:  James Billington, Samuel Huntington, Irving Kristol, Richard Solomon, and Adam Ulam. Special Trust, 277.  
33 According to McFarlane, the purpose of the planning effort was to produce “a series of studies,  to be conducted by experts both inside and outside the government, of twelve issues of strategic  interest to the United States, to identify the top two priority foreign policy items on which the  Reagan administration should concentrate in the second term.” Over the Thanksgiving holidays in 1984, McFarlane gave President Reagan 12 NSC-sponsored papers bound in a notebook and asked Reagan “to select the most important issues for us to focus on.” Sometime later,  Reagan handed the notebook back to McFarlane and said, “Gee, I’ve looked this over, Bud, and  I think these are just terrific ideas. Let’s do them all!” Special Trust, 287–289.  
34 National Security Decision Directive 166, Mar 1985. Victory: The Reagan Administration’s Secret  Strategy That Hastened the Collapse of the Soviet Union, 213–214; Steve Coll, “Anatomy of a Victory: CIA’s Covert Afghan War,” Washington Post, 19 Jul 1992, A1.  
35 Special Trust, 185–188; Karen L. Puschel, US-Israeli Strategic Cooperation in the Post-Cold War  Era: An American Perspective (Boulder: Westview Press, 1992), 35–99.  
36 Stephen Peter Rosen, “Mutiny and the Warsaw Pact,” The National Interest, no. 2 (Winter  1986): 74–82.  
37 Foreign Broadcast Information Service, Daily Report: Middle East and Africa, 5 Nov 1982, 113;  13 Dec 1982, 17–18; 15 Dec 1982, 16; 2 Mar 1983, 16; 22 Mar 1983, 13; 23 Mar 1983, 13–14;  14 Apr 1983, 110; 23 May 1983, 17; 6 Jun 1983, 14–15.  
38 Notra Trulock, III, “Emerging Technologies and Future War: A Soviet View,” Appendix B in  The Future Security Environment, Report of the Future Security Environment Working Group,  submitted to the Commission on Integrated Long-Term Strategy (Washington: Department  of Defense, Oct 1988), 97–163.  
39 The Future Security Environment, 6–7, 92–95.  
40 Goldwater-Nichols Department of Defense Reorganization Act of 1986, Public Law 99-433,  1 Oct 1986, Title II, Part A, Section 201.  
41 President’s Blue Ribbon Commission on Defense Management, A Quest for Excellence, Final  Report to the President (Washington: GPO, Jun 1986), xix, 12–13, 15, 18–20; Appendix, 5, 7.