## Introduction ##

Presidents Reagan’s second term manifested significant continuity with the first term. Nuclear and conventional force modernization continued, as did research into strategic defense. Congressional efforts to dampen inter-service rivalry in the Defense Department seized on the idea of strengthening the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff in the Goldwater-Nichols DoD Reorganization Act of 1986. One of the new responsibilities for the Chairman was to produce an annual military net assessment.

In the Soviet Union, Mikhail Gorbachev’s ascent to the leadership in 1985 produced a major shift in Soviet domestic and foreign policy. He cut military spending to free  up resources to invest in the economy and promoted the concepts of glasnost (openness) and perestroika (restructuring) in a futile effort to save the Soviet Union  from economic and political collapse. In an effort to maintain some sort of parity  with the United States while cutting defense spending, Gorbachev agreed to  negotiations on two classes of nuclear weapons, resulting in two arms controls treaties with the United States—the 1987 Intermediate Range Nuclear Forces (INF)  treaty and the 1991 Strategic Arms Reductions Talks (START) treaty. Soviet armed intervention in Afghanistan continued until 1989 when Gorbachev finally withdrew the Red Army without having achieved the Soviet Union’s strategic objectives.

Meanwhile, the Soviet Union itself began to dissolve slowly, starting with violence in the Baltic Republics and continuing through the Caucasus and Central Asian Republics. The United States continued to support evolving East European freedom  movements (particularly in Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary) with public statements and covert funding. Unlike Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968, the Soviet leadership decided not suppress these movements with the Red Army, nor those in the Republics of the Soviet Union. Eventually those countries and republics won their freedom and the Soviet Union and Warsaw Pact collapsed in 1991.

In China, Deng Xiaoping continued to focus inwards. He maintained his efforts  to reform the economy and the nation’s industry while also downsizing and  modernizing China’s armed forces and rooting out corruption in the senior officer  ranks. He negotiated the return of Hong Kong from the United Kingdom and the  return of Macau from Portugal, demonstrating to the Chinese people and the  world that the expansion of China could be peaceful. 

## Outline for 16 December 1994 Talk

[Note: Italicized items were not discussed during the interview.]  
### Assessments  
1. NATO/Warsaw Pact-biggest success  
2. Space  

### Competitive Strategies  

### Commission on Integrated Long-Term Strategy/Future Security Environment  
1. Vision  
2. [?] of (Backward look)  
3. Vessey men’s room conversation  
4. Pol [Policy/Political?] censor  — AIDS  — Soviet economy estimate  

### Nuclear strategy  
1. General  
2. Games/SDI—insights  

### USSR endgame/AWM general view  

1. Discussions with Dennis Ross at NSC  — Louis XVI  — Time on our side  
2. Meeting on U.S. demands  

### Goldwater-Nichols  
1. Coordinating Committee  
2. Crowe/dubious  
3. Joint Staff efforts/Marine colonel  

### Summer Studies 


1985–19882  

- Marshall: The idea is to talk about the period ‘85 through the end of ‘88. As I thought  about that time period—I didn’t make a lot of detailed notes—I thought I’d talk  about assessments, about competitive strategies, about the Fred Iklé-Albert  Wohlstetter effort [the Commission on Integrated Long-Term Strategy], about  the—actually it preceded it [CILTS]—the nuclear strategy effort that Iklé [Under  Secretary of Defense for Policy] wanted…  

- Q2: NSDG [Nuclear Strategy Development Group]  
- Marshall: …NSDG, yeah, and about the USSR endgame kind of things. Maybe there  are other topics that occur to you guys.  
- Q2: I’ll throw one out and you can throw it away.  
- Marshall: Yeah?  
- Q2: Packard Commission [President’s Blue Ribbon Commission on Defense Management], Goldwater-Nichols [Defense Reorganization Act of 1986], NSDD [National  Security Decision Directive] 219…  
- Marshall: Oh, yeah.  
- Q2: The whole nonsense about the [Joint Chiefs of Staff] doing net assessments and  the Net Assessment Coordinating Committee and…  
- Marshall: Yeah, we ought to talk about that. [Adds topic to his outline.] OK, that’s a  good addition.  On the assessment side, the only assessment I really have much memory of as  being a big thing, really, is the NATO-Warsaw Pact one. Now, we continued also  with the Investment Balances during that period, but we’ll take them up under  the USSR endgame. I can’t think of any other really major assessment that got  done during that period.  
- Q2: There was one that George Kraus did on space that was not really a net assessment… Well, it was a net assessment, but it wasn’t a future net assessment so  much as kind of a current thing. And as I recall, the NRO [National Reconnaissance  Office]—  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- 
- Q2: —so much disliked the results that they confiscated all copies and asked that it  not be distributed further and that sort of thing…  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
  
- Q2: —And I think the guy that did that was General Thomas Moorman.  
- Marshall: Well, there was something that wasn’t really our assessment. It was an  assessment that was done jointly with somebody on the Joint Staff. And, yes, the  NRO didn’t really like the outcome. It was one of these things which was asked for  by Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger, I think. It was requested. And we have  copies around. It was conducted as a joint activity with a variety of people, various representatives. It turned out to be an assessment which, even though the  NRO didn’t like it, was, by my judgment, extremely bland, because it was a consensus sort of thing and nobody got particularly hurt. The one thing I remember  about it is a recommendation that a bad decision had been made to rely entirely  on the Shuttle and that Defense needed to really get back in the business of  putting stuff up with boosters.  
- Q5: You don’t suppose the “soda straw” sensor business came up? You know, [did]  that set of decisions come up?  
- Marshall: No, not particularly, I think.  
- Q2: There was one other initiative that was not really a net assessment, but it was  this Interagency Technology Assessment Group. Do you remember that, the ITAG?  
- Marshall: Yeah.  Q2: And you had some people over in the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense  for Acquisition that were going to help. And I think maybe Ronald St. Martin was  over there doing it for a while, then Jerry Murphy or somebody. And we tried to have  this interagency group looking at what really key and critical technologies might  look like, with this army colonel named Jack Wood, I think, running the thing…  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q2: …out of Acquisition or something. The only reason I mention that is because  we participated in the thing. You didn’t lead it, but it sticks in the back of my mind  that it was related in some way to net technical assessments that you were trying  to get off the ground again. Nobody had really done one since Paul Berenson  many years ago. And I think you actually tried to get, I think it was St. Martin, and  then maybe Jerry…  
- Marshall: Well, St. Martin was over there. I think that comes later, though. I think it’s  maybe… You don’t think so?  
- Q2: I don’t think so, because I wasn’t here after ‘88…  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q2: …and that was going on, at least the ITAG…  
- Marshall: The ITAG thing was going on, but there was an effort to really get things  going again in the early part of the Bush period when Admiral Bill Small came on,  and I think that’s when St. Martin was there.  
- Q2: Okay. Alright.  
- Marshall: But even then, because… I don’t know, the timing of all that’s unclear to  me.  
- Q2: OK.  
- Q4: Going back up to your original menu, when does Newport start?  
- Q2: The Summer Studies.  
- Marshall: The first one is in LA, I think it was ‘85. And then in Newport in ‘86.
- Q4: I think that ought to be something on your agenda. It certainly is a very sizable  chunk of time.  
- Marshall: OK, we can talk about that. Right. Let me say one word more on the  assessment side about the NATO-Warsaw Pact balance, which ended up being, I  think, a very successful assessment.3 It also was the framework within which, because things had matured, we were able to incorporate a lot more on the Soviet  assessment stuff, the stuff that people had been doing and John Hines finally  brought to fruition. And even after that—again, I don’t know the date; maybe either towards the end of this period or the early Bush period, because I can’t quite  remember, again, when Hines finally left—  
- Q2: He left before this, because we got Ned Cabaniss in, and Ned was trying to do  that Middle East assessment. So John left. He went over to the Army Intelligence  Board.  
- Marshall: Yeah. But he did one very, very useful thing at the end, although Dmitry  Ponomareff sort of had to finish it. He went down and tried to catalog all of the  ways in which Soviet assessments might really be different than ours, in particular,  some of these very surprising things, things that you would think objectively people could measure and so on, but they obviously had very, very different views of.  One of them was in terms of the size of the craters that nuclear weapons make  and how the explosive energy and blast wave energy from a nuclear explosion  couples to the ground and so on, which leads to very, very different expectations  on their part about the vulnerability of silos and things of that sort.  The second one that struck me was just the very different estimate or belief in the  vulnerability of human beings to at least the kind of overpressure regimes that  are associated with fuel-air explosives, and may explain why they continued to go  ahead with these weapons in a way that we did not. They just see them as much  more lethal, and to this day one doesn’t know whether they’re right or we’re right.  Anyway, that is still a very highly classified document, but it was a really very interesting piece to just show all the ways in which their calculations and assessments  might be very different than ours. And some of the stuff that’s come out in his  [Hines] interviews with the Russians is like that, including the ramifications of that.  I guess the most striking story in that connection is that at least some of the  Russians you talk to make the point that…which I think is a really very, very  interesting one…The more general aspect is that whatever you’re doing, you’re  communicating something to the other side. And because of the spacing that  we chose for the Minuteman silos, supposedly wide enough apart that, under  our belief you couldn’t get “two with one” by putting a warhead in between, in  their way of calculating, that wasn’t true. Therefore, whatever we said, whatever  we did in exercises, they always believed the Minuteman missiles were first-strike  weapons [because they couldn’t survive a Soviet first-strike, so the U.S. would use  them first or lose them].  
- Q4: Have they subsequently confirmed that? Have we been able to talk to them  since the Berlin Wall came down that, indeed, that was something of a root difference in perceptions?
- Marshall: I don’t know that anyone has probed it at the level of, you know, “Let’s  compare calculations” and so on, but it certainly comes out in some of John  Hines’ interviews with these Russians. They certainly believed that ground-based  systems were much more vulnerable than we believed.  
- Q2: There was another area that I remember that was not quite as important, but, I  think, exemplifies this whole thing, and that we got hold of some of their numbers for conventional systems. And they ranked the M60A2 tank very, very high.  M60A2, that’s the Shillelagh missile one. And we thought, of course, it was a dog,  it wasn’t worth a damn, and we stopped building them. Well, by their measures,  you know, tanks that shot missiles through the tube were very, very effective.  They were, I think, building on the lessons of the ‘73 Arab-Israeli war in terms of  the vulnerability of tanks to anti-tank guided missiles. And so they went down this  whole path of tanks; one series of the T-64, the T-72, the T-80—all have missile-firing main guns. We stopped it after the M60A2, because we just thought it was  such a dog. Again, an asymmetric view of kind of the—in this case, more the technical than tactical characteristics of the system really led to very different kinds  of weapon systems. And different views of their effectiveness on the battlefield.  So when they’re looking at what the correlation of forces are at a particular point  they see, “Ah, M60A2s. Must be main attack” and we say, “M60A2s. National Guard.  Got the dogs.”  
- Q4: All 65 of them, or some modest number.  
- Q2: And then we have the Sheridans, of course, have the same kind of thing.  
- Q3: There was some talk or effort to get people to look at Soviet helicopters that  had been shot down in Afghanistan, to see if we could get some insights into the  differences in their design practices. Did that ever come through?  
- Marshall: I don’t know. Right. OK, let’s go on to item two, competitive strategies.  
- Q2: Can I say one more thing on the NATO-Warsaw Pact thing?  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q2: I think that was the first place where this concept of the “revolution in military  affairs” [RMA] was introduced in a formal assessment. Because we…  
- Marshall: That’s probably true.  
- Q2: I know we introduced it in that assessment. I think it was the first assessment  that introduced that notion.  
- Marshall: Well, of the assessments. It had first come up in connection with the CILTS  stuff. But in terms of what we were including in one of the assessments, yes, that’s  right.  
- Q2: And then we also got some Marshal Nikolai Ogarkov stuff, and not just the open  stuff like Always in Defense of the Homeland [Always in Readiness to Defend the  Fatherland, 1982], but we had some human intelligence that was giving us stuff  that, you know, really indicated that this was very, very important to the Soviets.  
- Marshall: Right.
- Q2: And we briefed Major General John Shalikashvili, who was the Assistant DCSOPS  [Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations and Plans] in the Army at the time, on this  thing, as well as Major General Wilson [Dutch] Shoffner, who was his predecessor,  on this particular thing, and both of them were very, very knowledgeable of that  particular source of intelligence that was confirming this view that Ogarkov and  the Soviet General Staff had about how there was going to be this revolution in  warfare coming.  I guess the other thing I would say is that caused the net assessment to get a fairly  wide distribution. Well, we did two versions. We had the codeword version, and  then we did a Secret version, and the Secret version got a wider distribution.  
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q2: It was probably one of the first efforts by the office to have this RMA concept  in it that then went out to people in the Department and said, “Here’s something  you ought to be looking at, because this is something the Soviets are taking very  seriously.”  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q5: There’s sort of one other tidbit about this. Earlier you and David Epstein were  going off and worrying about the defense burden over there [in the Soviet  Union], and it hadn’t gotten connected into the balance in the way that it probably should have at that time—  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q5: —if we’d been able to think the thing through a little more clearly. Did that  occur further downstream?  
- Q2: Yes. In fact, the third section of the balance looked really at… You know, the  first section was deterrence and how do the Soviets assess the balance. And  the second section was, “What if deterrence fails? What do we think likely war  outcomes might be?” And then a third section was, “What do we think is coming  in the future?”  And here is where we introduced the RMA, the Soviet view that this RMA is coming. But also this notion that there’s this increasing pessimism on their part that  they’re able to compete with us. They see that this RMA with the kinds of hightech things that are associated with it, because they were really focusing on it as a  technology kind of thing, like weapons based on new physical principles, and so  forth. They were just very pessimistic that they were going to have the resource  base, in its broadest sense [indistinct] S&T [scientific and technical] base [indistinct] that they were going to be able to compete with us. And I think that some  of that is what came out of David Epstein’s work on the investment balance.  
- Marshall: Yeah. And putting the two things together, it ended up with— And I  remember raising an issue for the top-level people that, “You really ought to be  thinking about how to invest in this stuff and to really take advantage of the…”  
- Q2: We specifically and explicitly also raised the competitive strategies notion—  
- Marshall: Yes, right.
- Q2: —in this context. You know, looking to the future, what should we be doing?  And we specifically said, “Well, we ought to think about competing with the  Soviets in this competitive strategies framework, where they’re having a very  difficult time making the kinds of investments that they need to stay up with us,  and we need to target our investments in such a way that it’s just going to make  it just that much more difficult for them, and get them to focus in areas that are  not particularly dangerous to us, like defense instead of offense.” So we were able  to— Part of that is sort of the serendipity of taking many, many years and many,  many authors to put this balance together.  
- Marshall: Right. OK, let’s go on to the competitive strategies thing. As I mentioned  last time, in some ways that story starts a long time ago, back at RAND.4 That was  in ‘69.5 And then, in the first year of the Reagan Administration, when the time  came to put together the policy guidance [Defense Guidance], Iklé asked me to  look at the draft and then asked me whether there was anything additional that  could be put in it. And I raised the point that there could be a section that tried to  focus people’s attention on the notion that in thinking about their programs they  ought to be taking account of what the impact on the other guy was, and, in particular, cost-imposing strategies. So he asked me to write a section, which he put  in there.6 And then essentially nothing happened. Even though, when Paul Thayer  came on board as Deputy Secretary of Defense, he looked at it, thought that was  a good idea, and a query was put out to the Services about, “What have you done  about this?” and various levels of nonsense came back.7  But then, what really happened was that in the second Reagan Administration,  Weinberger asked Graham Allison [Dean, Harvard Kennedy School of Government] to come down and help him, come down a couple of days a week, I think  it was, something like that. And one of the first things that Graham and I talked  about was that Weinberger wanted Graham, for one thing, to write the next  posture statement, and also wanted to cure this problem of these charges that  Reagan Administration defense officials don’t have a strategy and so on, and  how should we do this. As I mentioned the last time, I’d already had a session and  wrote a number of things to Frank Carlucci [Deputy Secretary of Defense] in the  first year of the first Reagan term, but nothing came of that either. That work dealt  with what you might do to really develop a strategy or have a strategy or what  would that all mean. Because of Graham, we talked about it and one of the ideas  was… the label picked was “competitive strategies.” He talked to Weinberger, and  even though it was something that had been really suggested before, this time  he bought it, to my surprise. He bought it, at least in the sense that he was willing  to see the thing kind of go along. I don’t think he ever did very much one way  or another about any of it. But it got started and therefore we got involved with  Graham, helping him get that whole thing underway.8 And then, both a good  thing and a bad thing, they picked Dennis Kloske [Deputy Under Secretary of  Defense for Planning and Resources] to be the one in charge. He was an energetic  person and he tried to push it. He kind of screwed it up, but it wasn’t like giving it  to somebody who didn’t do anything with it  He did all kinds of things with it. He was not bureaucratically very astute, and so  in the end it didn’t flourish very well. Although after the fact, there were people who came to me, guys who were younger and guys who were involved in it in the  Services, and said, “That was a good idea. We ought to do things like that.” But at  the time it didn’t flourish.  
- Q2: One thing in that regard, is that the O-5s and O-6s that were on the task forces  were trying to figure what the strategies should be to make up this competitive  strategy. They were really trying to make this thing work, as opposed to other  efforts associated with the RMA, where people were, for bureaucratic reasons,  trying to “block that kick.” These guys were really trying to make the thing work.  They were really analyzing things seriously and trying to figure stuff out. I’ve also  talked to a number of people who were on competitive strategy task forces at the  time that said it was one of the most broadening experiences that they ever had.  Really the first chance they ever had in their military career to do some strategic  thinking on something. They were sad that it just didn’t go anywhere. So at one  level, maybe it helped raise this notion for a group of officers that maybe now are  general officers, that there was a broader, larger way of thinking about what their  business really is, not just fighting the battle of the budget every week.  
- Q3: Can you think of any of the O-5s who are still around?  
- Q2: Well, they wouldn’t be O-5s now.  
- Q3: No, I know.  
- Q2: One guy that just talked to me last week is Marty Spolarich, who is still up in  OSD [the Office of the Secretary of Defense]. He was on the Navy Staff working  competitive strategies at the time. On the Army Staff was this guy Monty Meigs.  He wasn’t one of the guys on the task force. He was an Army Staff guy watching  all this. And he’s now a general officer. He’s a brigadier or major general now. And  he probably will be a three-star or a four-star someday [he retired as a four-star  general in 2002]. So he’s at least been exposed to the “virus.” And again, he was  on the Army Staff, he wasn’t on a task force, so he didn’t get the intense exposure  that people on the task forces did. And there was an Air Force guy Mike Hayden.  Mike Hayden was an Air Force colonel that worked competitive strategies on the  Air Staff. And Mike is now a brigadier general, J-2 in European Command, and  in between there was on the National Security Council staff in the Bush White  House. [Michael Hayden retired as a four-star general and served as Director of  the National Security Agency and Director of the Central Intelligence Agency.]  
- Marshall: Oh, yeah.  
- Q2: We were able to use him as a vehicle to get competitive strategies introduced  into a couple of the National Security Strategy [of the United States] documents,  because he thought it was a good idea and stuff.9 These are episodic things, but  there are still some people that are at general officer level, that were exposed to  this thing. Maybe someday they will come back to haunt everybody who was here.  
- Marshall: General Howell Estes, USAF, I think had something to do with it. Another  aspect of the competitive strategies effort, though, was the really, again, abysmal  performance of the intelligence people. They were told from the beginning, “If  we’re going to do this, we really need to know how the Soviets look at things,  think about things, and so on.” That message was repeated over and over again.And they never seemed to get it. And then, sort of midway through the thing, I  get feedback…I think there was a meeting with a bunch of them, and then it was  as though, “Ah! We finally got it!” And then they did a few things…10  Q4: There was a briefing on arms control. Competitive strategies and arms control.11  
- Marshall: Jim Roche did that.  Q4: Barry Watts and Chip Pickett put it together and Jim gave it out in California. 24  hours later it was sitting on the desk in the Secretary of Defense’s office. And as it  was recounted, he sort of looked at the definition that we put up and said, “Yeah,  that’s it.” And the study group served as a standing staff. I had a few windows into  what they were doing from time to time. But my impression is they went off and  said, “We’re going to make our own definition,” and six months later they were basically back to using the definition we had put together. We still have the charts.  
- Marshall: As I remember that meeting in L.A., I talked some about the general  aspects of it. Then Jim had his thing. Then there was a third thing by somebody,  which was one of these things where you just take the label and attach it to whatever it is you are doing.12 So it was a whole list of things, which…  
- Q5: Yeah, it was the “everything we’ve always been doing” [indistinct] competitive  strategies [indistinct].  
- Marshall: Yes, right. Stick a new label on it.  
- Q2: That was the initial kind of reaction to the Weinberger [competitive strategy]  memos, when he said, “We’re going to have a meeting, we’re going to have this  group and I’m going to chair it, and come in and tell me what you guys are doing  that’s associated with or even looks like this competitive strategies.” The Navy  gets in there and says, “Here is our competitive strategy. It’s called the Maritime  Strategy.” And he says, “OK, fine.” The Air Force stood up and said, “Here’s our  competitive strategy. These ten weapon systems here and technologies will allow  us to compete effectively with anybody around the world, anytime anyplace, it  doesn’t matter who it is. Those systems are our competitive strategies.” And then,  Army General Max Thurman [Army Vice Chief of Staff] got up and gave a very interesting special-access-program briefing on some stuff that the Army was doing.  That was closer to the mark. Obviously can’t go into it. But generally the Service  responses were—“We IS a competitive strategy.”  
- Marshall: I must say that the more senior military did not cover themselves with the  glory at all. General Colin Powell at some point said, “Well, we do this all the time.  This is what we always do.” Bullshit!  
- Q2: Jeff McKitrick had to go personally and brief Admiral Carlisle Trost [Chief of  Naval Operations], because the Navy initially wasn’t even going to play—  
- Marshall: That’s right.  Q2: —and Jaymie Durnan took McKitrick in to see Trost, because Trost wanted  to know “Who’s the troublemaker down there doing this stuff?” And so Jaymie,  said, “I think I should take McKitrick to see Trost.” So McKitrick went up there and  briefed him on what the initiative was and why and all that. And Trost said the  same thing. He said, “Look, we do this all the time. This is the way we do business.”
- Marshall: Well, the Navy had more of a complaint because of what they were really  doing. There was an area where they were really doing it.  
- Q2: That’s right. [Indistinct]  
- Marshall: And the Air Force, in some people. Although I generally found that people who were by far more responsive were like Richard DeLauer [Under Secretary  of Defense for Research and Engineering]. When that first guidance document  came out that I mentioned, he was very interested. Guys from business saw it  right away. In fact, he had some people do a quick-and-dirty analysis of, “What  is the cost of the Soviet air defense system and how can we do things that really  drive that up still further?”13 Or William Perry [DeLauer’s predecessor and Secretary  of Defense at the time of the interview]. Guys like that just see it right away. But  the military guys, on the whole, do not, despite Colin Powell’s “We do this all the  time” kind of thing. Maybe at a tactical level or operational level they do, but in  this investment sense, it is rare, very rare. Although…  
- Q5: At a tactical level? I can’t imagine what it would be.  
- Marshall: Well, you look at weaknesses. You look at exploiting weaknesses.  
- Q5: Yeah, you do try to put strength against weakness.  
- Marshall: Whereas most of the stuff that you see happen in the Building is characterized by countering new strengths that the other guy has.  Q2: Or, more typically, done irrespective of what the other guy is doing. You know,  “We need a new year’s supply of ‘Y’.”  
- Q5: [Indistinct] the other ones are old. Tactically, trying to put your strengths against  their weakness, in sort of a generic sense, was seen as producing tactical success.  Cost imposition, in a long-term sense, was not part of that.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q2: I think typically you don’t find at the tactical level this kind of series of moves.  The, “I’m going to think about doing this—now, what might he do in response?  So, what do I do then? What does that mean about my first move that I tried to  get him in a position…” Tactically, you don’t…  
- Q3: My understanding is that, in fact, some of the aspects of maneuver warfare do  have that. You act in a way so as to force him to react, which forces him to respond  in the way that you predict.  
- Q2: At the operational level, if you’re doing it right. And certainly at the strategic  level. But very seldom at the tactical level. You’re looking at single engagements  there, not…  
- Q3: Do you channelize the enemy when you force him to go to a certain way, but  you know [indistinct]. The business I was thinking about [indistinct]. I thought  commanders [indistinct]. 
- Q2: Commander’s Estimate.  
- Q3: Yeah.  
- Q5: I don’t think they get much beyond the first step. 
- Q2: Yeah.  
- Q5: I would agree.  Q2: That’s at the tactical level. At the operational level, you get some guys that are  good. They will think about it as a series of moves and how they want to be positioned better at the end of the day or…  Q5: I don’t know, but I can’t remember any documentary or war story evidence from  the Gulf War of us getting to a second round of steps and counters in anything  that was done, in planning or executing that campaign.  
- Q2: Maybe through serendipity, with the Marines offshore. When it turned out that  they couldn’t land because of the mines, then we said, “Well, let’s make a virtue  out of a necessity and try to use them to hold forces down and then we would  come in from the other direction.”  
- Q5: But competitive strategies thinking is different than blind luck.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q4: [Indistinct] I wonder whether thinking second- or third-order sort of moves  isn’t actually fairly unusual, even in the business world. There was sort of a newsy  article on learning in the Times about two months ago. And one of the points  made was that even if you go look at experienced chess players, they don’t, in  fact, think “move, move, countermove, move, move, countermove,” four or five  iterations ahead. They have such a wealth of experience that they instantaneously can recognize the lay of the board; the pattern recognition is extraordinarily  sophisticated. And their level of understanding the game is such that they can  violate the early rules that you are taught in the game, because they can see a  larger purpose. When the piece was written, it was really along the lines of “this is  the way human thinking may be and function.”  And I’m trying to think, maybe the reason why business people sort of latched onto  it is not because they’d been through the move-countermove-move problem, but  that because they had made so many mistakes in the past, and they’d had so much  experience with how you deal with competitors, that they sort of instantly recognized the validity of that kind of approach. And the whole notion of thinking about  moves and countermoves … in fact, they don’t go much beyond the first iteration.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q3: I don’t want to argue this, but it’s an interesting point. I know some guys at  Procter & Gamble. And they’d come up with this shampoo, like Pert. And what  they do is they deliberately test-market it in an area where they knew that the  competitors knew that Procter & Gamble test-marketed, also in an area where  they knew that there was not going to be too much demand for this sort of big  flop. So everybody says, “Nobody wants this. We were thinking about getting into  this. We are not going to get into it.” And P&G has this master plan for them going  massively into it. And they just captured [?] percent of the market when they did.  So at least there are a lot of anecdotes of people—  
- Q4: But the calculation there was to send the wrong signals to the [indistinct]  competitor.
- Q3: The idea that your action was a form of communication which shapes enemy  behavior in ways which are favorable to your future competitive position.  
- Q4: Absolutely. I’m not contesting that, not at all. I was reacting to this discussion about  whether we think two, three, or four moves beyond… [indistinct; multiple voices]  
- Q2: But in the Building, obviously, we generally have a hard time getting anybody  to think one step vis-à-vis… [indistinct; multiple voices]  
- Q4: That example is an excellent one about just understanding about how to use  the competitor against himself.  
- Marshall: Yes, right.  One other story about top-level people. I had a discussion with General Lew Allen  [Air Force Chief of Staff, 1978–1982]. He said he really wasn’t too sure about this  competitive strategies concept. There were two problems, he felt. One was that  we were so inconstant as a country that we could start something but not carry  through on it, and that could cause the other person to react, but then we would  fall off and we would end up in a worse position than we would otherwise be in.  And that’s a very real concern. There’s no doubt about that. But the other thing  was that we were up against the Soviets and they’ll just spend the extra money.  It was as though they had an endless supply of resources, that there was really no  resource limit, no long-term consequences.  
- Q3: My memory is that was Weinberger’s initial reaction to this. That the Soviets  were essentially resource-unconstrained.  
- Marshall: Well, yes. That comes up actually a little later, when we’ll talk about the  USSR endgame, because it was around, I think, ‘85, ‘86 that we actually had a  meeting and presentation for Weinberger. We’d done some things that Iklé  thought he ought to hear, that came out of the Investment Balance, which was  more along the line of, “They are having troubles, and these are…” Weinberger’s  view was that the cost to them of their military programs was very little, that they  didn’t have to spend a large percentage of their gross national product, because  in one form or another, they had slave labor in their plants, and the amount  paid to conscripts was very little. Which was true, overall true, but nonetheless  represents a diversion of resources: this man is not doing anything else, he’s over  there in this army. So Weinberger just struck me as someone who had no understanding of economics at all.  
- Q2: Let me ask you what you know about actual Soviet responses to the competitive strategy initiative. A couple of articles, in journals like Red Star, complained  about this as being another nasty move by the nasty Americans to drive the  Soviet empire onto the ash heap of history, which it already was, but…  
- Marshall: Right, right.  
- Q2: One other story. There was a U.S. delegation meeting with a Soviet delegation,  and it might have been a military…or it might have been military-to-military talks,  I don’t recall exactly now, but I know it was a Department of Defense-level talk  to a Soviet, military, maybe political-military, like say a Soviet Ministry of Defense  thing. And the U.S. delegation was asked by the Soviet delegation, “What about this competitive strategies thing?” And the response from the U.S. delegation was,  “Oh, don’t take that seriously. That’s nothing for you guys to really worry about.”  Do you remember that?  Marshall: I guess so. I think I remember.  Q3: It was the right thing to say in public, because it drove their paranoia level  higher.  Q2: It’s also what the guys on the U.S. delegation believed.  Marshall: There are other things along that line. I never really looked into it, but  there certainly were several articles and statements by the Russians with a whining “This is unfair” kind of tone, a “You’re trying to bankrupt us! That’s foul, foul!”  kind of thing.14 And then there was an astounding statement by a German at one  of our meetings, where we gave a little presentation on it. It was one of the things  on the agenda—and this one officer said, “Well, that could upset the balance. The  U.S. shouldn’t be trying to get ahead.” So there was tied into this whole thing a  sense of disrupting this comfortable parity situation.  I don’t have anything more on that. It’s a kind of interesting episode.  
- Q4: In a way, do you think the Soviets understood this better than our own people?  
- Q2: I think they understood it intuitively, because they do that kind of thing.  
- Marshall: I thought that by the time this happened, early ‘85 and into ‘86, there  must have been a lot of awareness among these people [the Soviets] that they  were really hurting. So I think that any notion that the U.S. was systematically  going to do things to drive up their costs or to focus on their weaknesses probably seemed very threatening.  
- Q4: Not to disagree with you strongly on this, but if perhaps we had done this  in 1962, we might not have provoked the same reaction out of the Soviets. In  other words, they may not have understood the concept that much; what they  understood was that they were, in fact, in a great deal of difficulty, and when  they saw something that was so clearly going to be focused on that, it was clearly  perceived as a threat.  
- Marshall: Well, in the late ‘50s, ‘60s, they were still feeling pretty optimistic, according to Vladimir Shlapentokh. And this kind of shift to considerable—  
- Q2: The question was Soviet understanding, not reaction to it. I mean, the understanding, I think, would have been the same in ‘62 or ‘85. But the response to it  in the ‘60s…they were much more optimistic about their prospects for success  and so they wouldn’t have been nearly as whining about all this, they would have  gone, “Yeah, that’s what we thought, and now we’re just going to…”  
- Q4: It seems to me it raises an interesting question of why our military didn’t—generalization—our military had a hard time grasping it, or didn’t. Our business people did. But here are the Soviets, whose business acumen is somewhat less but  from a military standpoint, they grasped it immediately. There’s something about  the way they were training or developing their officer corps, for example, and the  way we were developing ours which probably— 
- Marshall: I don’t know. It’s hard to know. It’s something you’d have to talk to John  Hines or somebody about.  
- Q2: For example, they obviously are long-time believers…or not believers, but tried  to do this thing, like “reflexive control” has been part of the Soviet military effort.  They’ve had, on the General Staff, offices devoted to deception and perception  management and things like that. Clearly, when you have those kinds of organizations that’s a manifestation of an inclination to look at your adversary and what  your adversary is doing and how he’s affected by what you are doing. You set up  organizations to try to manage that process. So certainly, it indicates that they’re  more aware of the importance of doing those kinds of things and trying to do  them than we do. We tend to think, “Well, put some loudspeakers on airplanes  and fly around and talk to the population, drop some leaflets, by God, that should  shape perceptions.”  
- Marshall: Let’s go on. I think the next thing we ought to talk about is this nuclear  strategy effort.  
- Q2: Can I say one other thing on competitive strategies?  
- Marshall: Yes, OK.  
- Q2: There have been some efforts since the collapse of the Warsaw Pact and the  Soviet Union, to characterize the Strategic Defense Initiative as an effort not really  to deploy a strategic defense, but really a way to bankrupt the Soviets, which  clearly would be a major kind of competitive strategy initiative.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q2: Did you ever get any indication from talking to Weinberger or any of those people that they saw SDI as kind of this final straw to break the Soviet back by being  such a huge shift in the strategic relationship?  
- Marshall: I don’t think so. I think a number of them did have this sense that this was  something that the Soviets would have trouble matching. But I don’t think it had  this other aspect.15 You know, if you were [indistinct] talking to people [indistinct]  about that.  OK, nuclear strategy. Here the story is that this was something that Iklé wanted to  do and, I think, right after the election started to focus on this.  The idea was the following: In the first years of the first Reagan Administration,  there had been this—I forget what it was called—“road map” or “master plan”…  Master Plan that had been put in place.  
- Q2: The NWEAMP? The Nuclear Weapons Employment and Acquisition Master Plan.  That one?  
- Marshall: Yeah. That ran out to ‘95, I think. And Iklé said, “We haven’t done the thinking beyond that, and we ought to start that now.” It was also driven by some other  things. First, there could be new technologies. There were going to be stealth  bombers. The way people had thought that they [indistinct] they didn’t take much  account of that, and there weren’t going to be that many until toward the end of  that period, with the Master Plan. Secondly, as a result of the changes made in nuclear targeting as a result of the stuff done during the Carter Administration,  signed off toward the end of the last year, really…I guess it was ‘79, wasn’t it,  when it was signed off? I forget.  
- Q2: PD-59 [Presidential Directive 59]?  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q2: Yeah. ‘79 or ‘80 [25 Jul 1980].  
- Marshall: The intelligence effort had been reoriented. One of the results of that was  that we were finding lots and lots of hardened buried structures. It was a period in  the early ‘80s when we became far more aware of the extent of the underground  construction efforts that had been undertaken. So the character of the target  system that we were going after was changing. Then, in addition, there was the  SDI initiative.  This Master Plan was very much in the mold of strategic nuclear planning, thinking that went back to the ‘50s and hadn’t changed at all, really. Iklé also had always  been concerned with and had some questions about the advisability of relying in  perpetuity on deterrence, as people had formulated it.16 In some sense, we were  staking everything on having the probability of a large-scale war at zero, really  zero, and not really dealing with the issue of, if in some way deterrence fails, what  the hell are we really going to do? He was very interested in that and wanted to  start this effort.  In the end, the effort was not entirely successful. [Indistinct] there was a lot of work  done, but it didn’t eventuate in any new, real plan that extended beyond the thing.  I can’t remember all of it [the Nuclear Strategy Development Group effort], except  that I was put in charge of an analysis steering group, I guess it was, and oversaw  various analytic studies that were done in connection with this, although a lot of  them were parceled out. One of the things that was done was a whole series of  war games that, in particular, looked at the effect of potential SDI programs. If I  remember, there were 14 of these things played over about two years. I thought  they had some very interesting results. And as people played through them,  repeatedly, various situations…  We started the games with people kind of playing Red and Blue as though they  were the national command authorities on the two sides. After the first couple  of games, I threw that out the window, because, in the first place, I think the kind  of people who you get to play these games don’t reproduce the kind of behavior you get from really top-level leaders. Secondly, they spend all of their time  endlessly on stuff that they’re not very good at. So the second kind of game we  organized around the notion of, “Alright, you people are essentially the general  staff. You are planning what war plans will be, and then you play through the  things.” And that turned out to be far more effective. They could play these roles  and it got them out of the political bullshitting they did otherwise.  And the outcome, I thought, had taught me some things, anyway. First, what the  games showed was that contrary to the kind of argumentation that was going on  about SDI, the people in the game found the presence of SDI systems stabilizing, not destabilizing. The argument tended to be, “It’s going to be destabilizing  because one or both sides are going to see that if the other side is going to attack,  then I have fewer missiles, and I can’t get through, and therefore he’s going to do  me in, and so on.” But, in fact, in the games people had just psychologically the  other reaction, and it wasn’t that they were stupid or not calculating. Because if  both sides had these systems, the first strike, the initiating strike was not going to  be as successful. And both sides also felt more secure.  One of the other things, though, of course, that happened in the games was  that the players moved toward strategies in which the first thing they tried to  do was degrade the other guy’s SDI system, not just strike out at his homeland.  And, of course, if one side is able to remove the other guy’s SDI and keep his own  or something like that, you have a very asymmetrical situation and the person  without an SDI ought to give up.  So you had a very different kind of situation. And it also convinced me that such  things as the “Nitze criteria” are nonsense.17  
- Q3: What is that?  
- Marshall: The cost-effectiveness kind of thing. Because the insertion of an SDI  system into the overall picture changes the whole nature of the game. That’s the  big thing that happens…  If you continue on as though it’s still the same game, you’re just not getting it.  And so that all of the kind of usual systems analysis— And the RAND guys ran  some stuff that was nonsense, took their earlier models and ran them, which  just showed me how awful most of the analysis was, that people just don’t think  about how things change.18 And I tried to use analogies: OK, here’s chess. And you  know how to play it. But supposing the board is enlarged a little and two new  pieces are put in that have different moves than any of the existing pieces. That’s  a new game. And the opening might be different. So playing your usual openings  might not be a smart thing to do in this new game. And this was the significance  of SDI systems, if they could ever get put in place, that is. That’s how you ought to  think about them.  In those kind of circumstances, it’s one of the virtues of war games that they allow  you to get at it, get some preliminary notion of how the whole nature of the  game has changed and how you ought to be thinking about things like measures  and what’s important. If you go on with the standard systems analysis, guys who  just take the old models and run them with some new things in them, you’re  probably going to get the wrong answers.  
- Q2: Was it the NSDG games that also really highlighted this notion of “preferential  defense,” and the kind of leverage you got off of preferential defense, or was that  another series?  
- Marshall: No. People knew about preferential defense. That came out of the standard calculations.  Q?: [Indistinct] way back in the ‘60s.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right. 
- Q2: On the RSAS [RAND Strategy Assessment System], were you trying to use the  RSAS to get at some of these things?  
- Marshall: The original notion of the RSAS came out of the Defense Science Board  Summer Study of ‘78, where there was a look at the whole issue of the nuclear  balance. And, of course, I’ve had the kind of heretical view that most of the analysis  of the nuclear situation is pretty poor. So out of that came a recommendation that  we use a much more war-gaming approach to looking at the nuclear balance, and  also embed it in a wider war.19 I think we talked about this last time. Strategic  nuclear conflict tends to be treated as though it’s a detached weight-lifting  contest; here is the football game going on over here and then over to one side  there is a weight-lifting contest that’s not connected with this ongoing game.  And it has a lot of other difficulties, the standard analysis. It just arbitrarily treated  nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines as having no vulnerabilities, which  is not true, particularly if there were any kind of extended conventional phase,  when the worst that might happen is the attrition of the submarines, particularly  on one side. Might make a difference, huh? Not in any of the known calculations  of the strategic balance.  
- Q3: You weren’t always [indistinct].  
- Marshall: Well, wait a minute… Alright, so we… Look, that was the notion for that,  though. Then the guys at RAND kind of screwed it up as far as I was concerned,  and you could never drag them back to what its original purpose was. They ended up developing it as a way of analyzing regional wars.20  
- Q2: Well, even there it was screwed up.  
- Marshall: Yeah, we understand that. So we did not use it for… In principle, it could  have been if it had ever fulfilled the earlier hopes, yes. Look, they were not good  at almost anything. They didn’t have the right idea of the regional conventional  fight, and they never got on with what was supposedly the fundamental purpose  of doing it— to really get at large-scale nuclear warfare in the context of a wider  war.  
- Q3: I just remember this one briefing that we went to. The briefer said, “Well, regional warfare is so complicated, we can’t treat everything in equal detail. We’re just  going to not look at the NATO northern region or the Far East, because it’s totally  irrelevant for the nuclear war thing.” And Andy starts going… “Where the hell do  you think those bastions are going to be?”  Q5: I can remember reading advertisements from RAND. At a certain point, this  [RSAS] was the flagship of the RAND Corporation. 
-  Marshall: Yeah, right. OK, this nuclear strategy thing went on until about the middle  of ‘86, I think, so it was going on about a year and a half. Then in the middle of ‘86,  Wohlstetter and Iklé sold the idea of this commission [Commission on Integrated  Long-Term Strategy]. Originally, it was jointly sponsored by the NSC and by the  Defense Department. And as the thing ended, the NSC kind of withdrew. But it  was started in the middle of ‘86.  
- Q2: Was Bill Cockell on the NSC? 
- Marshall: Yeah, I think so. So there was the commission. [Indistinct] I forget everybody who was on it, but there were four working groups. Retired General Paul  Gorman ran one on low-intensity warfare. Henry Rowen and Fred Hoffman ran  one on power projection on the periphery of the Soviet Union. Charlie Herzfeld  ran one on technology. And Charlie Wolf and I ran one on the future security  environment, in which we tried to provide to the commission a view of what the  next 20 years might look like.21 So we formed a group of people to help us look at  that. At RAND, in particular, they did long-term economic projections, which have  turned out to hold up very, very well.  They made a big breakthrough. They were the first people to apply purchasing  power parity to China. Otherwise, you had these people doing all these things  and then this Chinese number prepared on a totally different basis [indistinct].  And at least for me, the study of the future security environment was very formative in terms of my thinking. Really, I haven’t changed my views on the basic  sort of things going on in the world that much since that time. I came out of that  experience feeling that three big things are happening, from a defense point of  view. One is this geopolitical transition, which we weren’t able to articulate well,  because Iklé didn’t want us to point out how weak we thought the Soviet Union  was and was likely to be. Another is the proliferation of weaponry and so on. And  another is the military-technical revolution.  But the thing that is, I think, interesting to talk about in the context of this  commission was that both Charlie and I were, in fact, very frustrated by… In fact,  even though people seemed to agree, and it was included in the more general  summary document, I came away with the feeling, and I think Charlie also, that  the commission itself, because of the preoccupations of Albert Wohlstetter and to  some extent Fred, but particularly Albert, was much nearer term in its focus. While  the thing was supposed to be about the next 20 years, it was in large part about  undoing wrong thinking of the past and talking about what you would do, the  forces you needed now. Far more remained very focused on the Russians, didn’t  really deal with other things, and remained very, very focused on the Russians.  Let me tell you a story. One of the meetings of the full commission was held in the  Old Executive Office Building. I remember during one of the breaks going down  the hall to the men’s room with General [Retired] Jack Vessey and telling him my  sense about the commission and the fact that they just weren’t getting it in terms  of what I thought Charlie Wolf and I were trying to tell them. And he sort of said,  “Well, I agree with you. The Russians have had it. It’s just a matter of time.” This  would be the spring of ‘88 [before Dec 1987], I guess, about that time. I tell you  the story mainly because here’s Vessey, who says he agrees, but he doesn’t say  anything [about it to anyone else]. So you can have these situations where a lot of  people really know what’s happening, but it somehow isn’t quite accepted openly  to talk about it.  
- Q4: Why would Vessey have been mute on the subject? Hardly known for being bashful.  
- Marshall: I don’t know. Again, to really say that at that point still was to say something which, as I say, some people might increasingly believe, but maybe people aren’t sure enough, whatever it is, but they’re not willing to say, “Look, this document ought to be different. We ought to [focus?]…”  And as I mentioned to you, talk about [indistinct]. As we were approaching putting  the thing out, at one point Wolf and I made the argument that the base case for  the Russian economy ought to be not the Central Intelligence Agency number,  but it ought to be a number which puts instead of… The CIA number at the time  gave the Soviet GNP as about 55 percent of the U.S. GNP, but we thought it’s more  like 30 to 35 percent, and that ought to be the base case, and there ought to be  this potentially higher one if we’re wrong, and then a lower one. But what we  ended up doing was, essentially on Iklé’s insistence, that the base case be the CIA  number, which I thought was totally hokum at that point, and had for some years,  and then we had, I think, two other cases that were lower.22 So that’s the way that  we handled that.  The other thing where what we felt didn’t quite get reflected in the final result  was about AIDS, which we felt to be a major sort of thing. It hasn’t turned out to  be quite as big an economic problem for the United States as I thought it might  be, but we felt it was going be a big thing. Iklé was concerned that the report, at  least the summary report, really not say much of anything about AIDS because  it’s the kind of thing that the journalists would grab ahold of and wouldn’t pay  attention to the real central things.  But at any rate, I thought the future security environment thing was very interesting and certainly formative of my own views.  Q2: How would you rate the other three working group products?  
- Marshall: I thought Gorman’s thing was quite good, the—  Q3: Really? I thought he went really overboard in the application of information  technologies to the conduct of the counterinsurgency mission.  
- Marshall: Umm-hmm.  
- Q3: I mean, he’s a very smart guy and knows a lot, but I always remember being very  skeptical about that. In other words, if you had Cray supercomputers and “thinking  machine” parallel processors, boy, you could have really done a job in El Salvador.  I thought, well…?  
- Marshall: Yeah. Well, let me say of all the other three, I think he’s the best. The technology one—I guess there was a lot of pulling and hauling among the people  there.  
- Q3: People seemed to be using it to push their pet projects.  
- Marshall: Yeah. And the other one, the power projection report, the other kind of  scenarios, was sort of OK, but nothing new.  Well, then that gets into this USSR endgame. Again, over this period I was becoming progressively more convinced that the CIA numbers were wrong; their  estimate of the Soviet GNP is too big, and they’re underestimating the size of  the military expenditures. Dennis Ross has come back to Washington and is at  the NSC. I go and have talks with him from time to time. And Dennis is telling me about the discussions he’s having with people sort of comparably positioned, I  guess, in Russia. I suppose some of them are in the foreign ministry, some of them  are in some of the Party committees. He tells me how seemingly frank and open  things are. And I keep telling him—and, of course, we’re in the midst of various  arms control negotiations and other things—one of my themes is, “Look Dennis,  you need to think of the people you’re talking about as Louis XVI’s ministers. They’re  not going to be there very long. Time is on our side. They’re going to come apart.  Instead of making long lists of fallback positions in negotiations, we ought to be  looking at and putting lists of we want, what are our demands as their position  weakens.” In fact, we had a meeting here in this room, where Dennis actually  came with the idea, “Let’s just generate some of this.” It didn’t turn out to be very  successful. People couldn’t get into the spirit of things, from my perspective.  Q2: So you didn’t have withdrawal from Eastern Europe on that list or anything like  that?  
- Marshall: No.  
- Q3: Partition of the Soviet Union?  
- Marshall: No, nothing interesting. We didn’t have really detailed scenarios. It probably would have been a good thing to do that. We didn’t do that. It was just sort of,  “Look, these guys are in deep, deep trouble.”  
- Q3: Just let me ask a point of clarification. Was Dennis, when he was talking with his  Soviet counterparts…They were telling him how bad things were in the Soviet  Union?  
- Marshall: No. It was more how open they were. Presumably they talked about some  of their own internal problems, but it was more how open, how more approachable, how willing to discuss things, you know, they were.  During this period, the people who were relaying stuff about how things were  coming apart and so on were still people like Shlapentokh and Jim Billington and  Igor Birman, and occasionally Vladimir Bukovsky would come by and talk. There  was a growing set of stories, but mainly corning still from the same people. Also  about this time, Charlie Wolf had become convinced… he’d done this stuff on the  “cost of empire.” I forget the dates, exactly, of when that…  
- Q3: I think it was a little bit earlier.  
- Marshall: But he went through a second stage of things. The first set was done in  the early ‘80s, but then there was some other stuff that was done.23  
- Q3: It’s the ‘85–‘88 time frame that the Anders Åslund papers started to circulate.  
- Marshall: Yeah, and Anders Åslund came and we talked with him.24 He had spent this  year [1987–88] at the Wilson Center. So there was a gradual increase of things. And  then there was a meeting at Stanford that must have occurred at this time, of some  people from the Agency and a lot of the critics about the estimates of the Soviet  economy, some of which ended up in this book [The Impoverished Superpower].25  Also ‘86 was the time of the meeting of the four of us with President Ronald  Reagan. This meeting took place the day [14 Apr 1986] that there was the strike against Muammar Qaddafi, actually. The four of us were Harry Rowen, Charlie  Wolf, myself, and the guy from Duke, Vlad Treml. The purpose of the meeting was  related to discussions underway about the agenda for the next meeting of the  Group of 7. One of the proposals that was being put forward by one of the guys  on the NSC—and he was the guy who arranged this meeting with Reagan—was  that the topic should be the state of the Soviet economy and where things were  going, and then we’d start off the discussion of how are we going to manage this  thing.  At the meeting, Rowen talked some about the economy in general; Charlie talked  about the “cost of empire” thing; I talked about the military burden and how  it ought to be looked at, particularly in view of the reduced estimates that we  ought to have of the GNP, the gross underestimates of the resources going into  the military establishment; and then Treml talked about the combination of the  “second economy,” and the corruption, and the mistakes he thought were being  made, and the importance of the imported technology from the West, and the  distortions in the pricing system, and so on. There were a whole bunch of people  at the meeting, other than Reagan himself. Vice President George Bush was there,  Secretary of the Treasury James Baker, Secretary of State George Shultz wasn’t  there but Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs Allen Wallis was. Some of  the other people from the WhiteHouse I can’t remember.  
- Q2: JCS?  
- Marshall: No.  
- Q2: DoD? OSD? CIA?  
- Marshall: No.  
- Q3: What did the President say?  
- Marshall: He didn’t really say very much, except he nodded at various points, and  said, essentially, “I agree with you.” Bush said absolutely nothing. Baker asked a  question or two. The meeting was about an hour, I guess. Each of us talked about  ten minutes and then there was time for some questions. The whole thing, as I  said, was preliminary to a decision about whether it was going to be an agenda  item for the G7. In the end, it turned out not to be that. Because the notion of this  NSC guy was, “Look, if we’ve been making these mistakes in these estimates, we  ought to see what other people’s views are and get into a discussion of, ‘What if  they’re really in all of this trouble?’”  
- Q3: Can you say who the NSC guy was who made the meeting [indistinct]?  
- Marshall: Lou Pugliaresi  
- Q3: He was brought on as sort of one of the senior economic analysts [indistinct].  
- Marshall: That’s right, yeah. He’s the one who arranged it, because he became  aware of the stuff that I was doing, Harry and Charlie…  
- Q3: Lou was also tight with Dennis.  
- Marshall: Yeah. The last thing to say about this USSR endgame is that as this period  wore on, more and more my view was, look, we’ve won. Really, it’s like in chess. You’ve come out of the middle game. You have this tremendous advantage in  material, but you’ve got to not screw up the endgame. You still got to win. So the  whole thing to really focus on is being bright about the endgame.  I’d say the last year of this period was very much time [indistinct] into the first part  of the Bush Administration. One of the things I did, I wrote a memo to Secretary  of Defense Frank Carlucci. Weinberger left and Carlucci came in. I would never  have bothered to send it to Weinberger, but I did send it then to Carlucci, about  six months before the end of the Reagan Administration. It was a memo that was  aimed at influencing what the last posture statement would say. The memo said  to him that there’s a very substantial chance that the Soviet Union will not be able  to keep up, that they will have to cut back on their military establishment, that  the country may founder. We ought to start thinking about positioning ourselves  about how we’re going to defend the defense budget when this happens.  Q3: You’re so sly, Andy. How’d you get to be so sly?  
- Marshall: I don’t know. It’s all obvious. My view about it is it’s all so obvious that—  
- Q3: To me, in the mid-1980s, it was not so obvious that the Soviet Union was going  to collapse [indistinct] serious difficulties [indistinct].  
- Marshall: Well, this would be in the middle of ‘88. Yes, I wrote in this memo…  
- Q3: I’m not arguing with you.  
- Marshall: Well, I didn’t envisage the rapidity of the collapse. But by that time General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev is really screwing everything up and things are  really coming apart. Anyway, I felt that…  
- Q2: You saw some major shift going on.  
- Marshall: Oh yes. At any rate, I said that it was dangerous for the Defense Department… As I say, the memo was targeted on how they ought to be beginning to  talk about things and not write a posture statement that…  Q2: Was threat-driven, Soviet-driven defense budget. What was Carlucci’s reaction?  
- Marshall: I never heard a word.  
- Q2: That was his reaction.  
- Marshall: That’s right.  Q4: And he’s a businessman.  
- Q2: That’s not clear from his experience at Sears.  Q3: Let me ask you kind of a contrarian question. I remember at least as late as ‘84,  maybe ‘85, that one of the things that you and I always used to also talk about  was the need to think through, “What if we really had to quadruple American  defense spending?”  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q3: Because, you know, we’re thinking… I heard of specific scenarios [indistinct] but  the chances of a really radical American foreign policy catastrophe were one in  four, as I recall, [consensus?] figure— 
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q3: —and that, therefore, one of the things we have to get people doing is, forget  about this, “How do we justify the two-percent increase over what we’ve got?”  kind of stuff, but what if we have to go into a 1950–51-style buildup?  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q3: Now, clearly the two are logical alternatives: the collapse of the Soviet Union  and [indistinct]. But these are two really interesting scenarios that we have to be  prepared to think about. Or was one dominant and the other was not, or one was  dominant in one period and the other was dominant in a later period?  
- Marshall: I would put it this way: In the early ‘80s, on the one hand, you started  to get all this information about the Soviets, and they’re really probably in real  trouble, and they’re pessimistic, and this and that, and so on. On the other hand,  one thing I did have apprehension about was that the Reagan kind of buildup  was too brute force and couldn’t be sustained, that you probably would have  been wiser—which probably was a mistake on my part—that it would have been  better to have tried to have less of a kind of brute-force buildup and try to spend  the money better in the competitive strategies sense. Certainly you should have  some buildup, but you probably weren’t going to be able to sustain this kind of  brute force, just-pouring-money-at-it kind of thing. I was concerned about that.  Then I think the other thing was that I always felt that U.S. actual military preparations were never very comprehensive or well-balanced. On the upper end, we were  really relying very much on deterrence and that really big wars were never going to  happen. And you might get into a situation where your judgment about that would  change, in which case you’re going to have to undertake really big expenditure  efforts. And we ought to be thinking about that, about how we’re going to do that.  I think in some ways we were very lucky, very fortunate that we had this deterrent  focus. And, of course, we were much richer than the Russians, richer than we generally understood at the time. But we were betting a great deal on there not really  being a war. The Russians, on the other hand, although they certainly wasted a  lot of money, also had far more comprehensive preparations for actually fighting  than we ever did. And it’s one of the sources of our underestimating it, the size of  their efforts.  If you talk to the Germans now, who during much of this period I was trying to tell  that the Russians and the East Germans had various serious preparations and so  on, they relate with surprise what they’ve found as they’ve gotten into discussions and [gained] insight into what the East Germans were really doing. They’re  surprised at the level of readiness that was maintained, at the huge ammunition  stockpiles compared to them; of course, they [the West Germans] had a systematic policy of only buying a few days of ammunition.  And they’re surprised at the preparations for early use of nuclear weapons.  
- Q2: Actual plans for conducting…  
- Marshall: Right, for really conducting war.26 The West Germans didn’t have plans for  really conducting war.
- Q2: And even surprised at a technical level. The West Germans got their hands on  some East German equipment, I think in the armor/anti-armor area. They were  very surprised how it was much more capable, both in terms of armor protection  and in terms of ballistics, than they had thought it was. Now, we for some reason  always figured that the next generation of tank that we put out wasn’t as good as  the next generation that they put out. We always had this “bathtub of ignorance”  in the armor/anti-armor arena, we were always lagging them. The Germans never  ever really quite subscribed to that. And they always kind of thought, well, the  Leopard and Leopard II and all that is keeping pace very well with what they’re  doing on the other side. And then when the collapse came and they got their  hands on it, it wasn’t true, it wasn’t true. They actually did live fires of tank on tank  and Leopard IIs were getting killed and they weren’t able to kill the bad guys.  Q3: Just to come back to this USSR endgame stuff. I was trying to figure out… What  seems to be really useful and unusual and smart about the way you were thinking  about this was that you were really willing to entertain simultaneously outliers on  both sides.  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q3: That the endgame might be very messy and nasty and violent and you had to  not necessarily spend a lot of money, but you think very hard about that.  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q3: But also that it might be extremely advantageous to us, but we could still blow  it if we didn’t think about it. And my problem was always that I would tend to bet  my previous positions, or rather, that I would bet against my fears. I would bet  against the worst outcome and I’d say that’s what we have to plan against. And  not take the upside seriously, so I would never be in a position to exploit opportunities when they came. So that’s useful,  
- Marshall: OK, let’s talk about Goldwater-Nichols as it deals with this office.  Goldwater Nichols came along in, what, the middle of ‘86?27  
- Q2: After the Packard Commission.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right. Well, there are two things. One is, I took the trouble later to try  to understand why the Packard Commission had these recommendations in the  commission report about net assessment.28 According to Gorman, who was on  the Commission, he and Carlucci were the ones who put that in, because they  thought that a broad kind of look at where things were going would be very, very  important and very useful. But what they had in mind when they tasked or suggested that the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff come forward with this net  assessment… They did not wish… Since I haven’t talked to Carlucci, maybe this is  just Gorman’s view. His view was that this was something that should happen at  the beginning of the cycle of setting the budget’s programs. It is something that  should be prepared in a few weeks by the very top-level people, that is, by the  Chairman in consultation with the theater commanders in chief, and should represent their distilled view of what the current situation is, where things were going.  And then, that should be presented to the President and should assist him in deciding on the budget level that would be laid down for the next couple of years. What happened when that was received over here [the Pentagon], was that the  JCS or the Joint Staff, who had been preparing something that they called a “Risk  Assessment” at the end of the process, would relabel that, rework that, and that  would be the response. So it became a staff document, not the appreciation of  the top people.29  One of the things that happened at another level was this Net Assessment  Coordinating Committee was created by Iklé, to be jointly chaired by Iklé and the  Director of the Joint Staff. It was to be, under the initial notion, a place where an  exchange of views could take place between, say, this office and the Joint Staff  representatives about what each one was planning to do, which areas they were  going to be covering, and so on. It met a couple of times and didn’t do anything.  It got revived later for very different reasons, essentially to staff the net assessment that would be sent over to the Congress, because the Congress stipulated  that it wanted net assessments. And also there were some net assessment studies  that were tasked to the Department by the Congress, and this was a forum for  deciding who within the Building would answer, and to review what was done.  
- Q2: A lot of it was driven by Tony Cordesman.30  
- Marshall: Yes, right.  
- Q2: …who kept putting this requirement for net assessments in the law.  
- Marshall: So they’ve now died off—  
- Q2: Cordesman’s back on Senator John McCain’s staff.  
- Marshall: —and don’t happen anymore, for the moment anyway.  The other thing to talk about the Goldwater-Nichols business is that I think it led,  initially, to kind of delusions of grandeur or competence on the part of the Joint  Staff, who thought they…were going to take over this whole area and so on. And  it also, I think, was complicated in the initial stages by Admiral William Crowe’s  [Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff] relations with Weinberger that, I think, were  not very good. In fact, I remember sitting in a meeting with Crowe and talking  with him about these various net assessment problems. In fact, I prepared a paper, I think, at one point for him about what I thought the state of net assessment  was and the kind of things that might be usefully attempted.  But I remember him telling me that he wanted to do an assessment of his own,  and he didn’t want the results dictated by politicians and so on. And I don’t know,  on the one hand, he certainly, I think, had some doubts about the competence  of the Joint Staff to really do this sort of thing. On the other hand, he allowed this  Marine colonel, I forget what his…  
- Q2: James Sims.  
- Marshall: Yeah, Sims, to become overly ambitious and so on. Although it was interesting, I remember being out on the West Coast and receiving a call from Crowe.  He was going to have to go up on Capitol Hill to give some sort of presentation  and wanted to know if we could help. And I called back to the office and had people here put together what became his kind of overall assessment of the situation  in the world. That was done overnight for him. 
- Q2: It’s the only time I’ve ever seen this office go into a crash mode like you see on  the Army Staff. Really, it was amazing. Scott Fisher was the Assistant Director at  the time or something.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q2: And they parsed the whole thing out and gave everybody writing assignments.  And we went into this crisis mode, everybody writing a section and bringing it in  and David Epstein editing it and going back out again and all this other stuff. And  we put the thing together in 72 hours or something like that. I think it was a Top  Secret-level document. But it’s the kind of thing you always do on a Service staff,  never in this office. And here we were doing this for the Chairman of the Joint  Chiefs of Staff. And he used it.  
- Marshall: Yeah, he did. Right.  
- Q2: It was really the basis for his testimony.31  
- Q3: I’m still kind of puzzled, because I know that Crowe thought very highly of you.  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q3: Remember that he brought you and Rosen out [indistinct] that East Asian balance when he was CINCPAC [Commander in Chief, Pacific Command]?  
- Marshall: Yes, right. Well, I don’t know. I was puzzled. I would call him occasionally.  I think he thought well of us, and yet I think that one of the bad aspects of the  Goldwater-Nichols Act was that it tended to move the Joint Staff to seal itself off,  to have these kind of ambitions to take over things, which has kind of gone away,  to some extent.32 But there was this initial, as I say, period of delusions of competence. Which is unfortunate that you have to say that in a way, but… right.  OK. Maybe the final thing to talk about is the Summer Studies. The motive for that,  in a way, came out of some discussions between Jim Roche and I, and Dennis,  maybe in a minor way, I can’t remember, but mainly Jim and I. There was this sense  that there weren’t enough young people getting into this business, and there wasn’t  enough communication between various groups—the academics, the people  here in this building, the people on the congressional staffs—and that we would  try to help that through these Summer Studies, and we might get something useful out of it. So we organized, and the first one was held out in Los Angeles at RDA  [Eds: a defense contractor], which kind of organized it.33 This first Summer Study  probably was in ‘85. I don’t know that that’s the right date, it could have been ‘84.  The focus of the first one was rather different than the later ones, as I remember  it. There were, I forget, a couple of groups. One of the groups, that I think Dennis  chaired, was to come up with ideas of issues, topics that deserved study, analysis,  and so on. I don’t know. What’s your memory of that?  
- Q3: Dennis talked about the Middle East.  
- Marshall: Yeah. But there was an effort to kind of catalog a whole bunch of issues.  
- Q3: No, I remember. His group’s task was to develop a research agenda.  
- Marshall: Yes, right.
- Q3: And I must admit—I did the other working group—I can’t for the life of me  remember what that working group did, but I do remember Dennis talking only  about the Middle East in his brief.  Marshall: Well, I think both of them were focused on generating agendas, in a way.  
- Q3: Yeah. I remember my group sort of did this tour of the horizon focusing on  problems of warring regions, but beyond that I can’t [indistinct].  
- Q2: If the original ideas was to get young people involved, who did you have involved that’s now a senior-level strategic thinker?  
- Q3: I don’t know. It was heavier on the academics, because I remember…  
- Marshall: There were a lot of academics, and there were some people from the  RAND Graduate Institute, and then there were a few people from the Congress.  
- Q2: Any staffers of note?  
- Q3: Aaron Friedberg was there, Steve Rosen was there, Steve David was there—  these are all academics, Princeton and Johns Hopkins. I think there were more, a  lot of people from the RAND Graduate School because Charlie Wolf was heavily  involved. And then there were a bunch of Albert’s protégés from Pan Heuristics.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q3: And there were some guys from the Army. Captain John Rose. A nuclear artillery  guy.  
- Q2: Yeah, he’s a brigadier general now over in SHAPE [Supreme Headquarters Allied  Powers Europe], in charge of their strategic planning.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q2: Yeah, he was [indistinct]. But I can’t remember any staff guys.  
- Marshall: I think probably the staff people, maybe…  
- Q3: It was in California, it was hard for them to get there.  
- Marshall: Yeah, but I think we had one or two.  
- Q3: Oh, the guy who wound up running anti-ballistic missile stuff … He was on the  Senate staff and then he came over [indistinct].  
- Marshall: Oh, Brian Dailey?  
- Q3: No, I’m sorry I can’t remember his name.  
- Marshall: At any rate…  
- Q3: Yeah, there was one [indistinct].  
- Marshall: Yeah. And then the next one was up in Newport. We decided that’s a lot  better. And we had also probably the biggest set of people from the Hill.  
- Q3: Right. Jackie Clegg [indistinct]. That was when we did long-range, nonnuclear strikes,  war planning against the Soviet Union involving long-range, nonnuclear strike capa -  bilities and how they could be used to degrade Soviet nuclear capability. That relates  to your [Marshall] point about how the nonnuclear phase affects nuclear capabilities.
- Q2: Do you have Henry Sokolski at that next one?  
- Marshall: I think so, yeah.  
- Q2: Sokolski, and then there’s this other guy who was a Senator Robert Dole staffer.  
- Marshall: Yes. I forget his name.  
- Q2: He wasn’t very helpful. He just wanted to go run around Newport.  
- Marshall: And Janne Nolan was there?  
- Q2: Not Janne Nolan. The one who went to Harvard to work with Samuel Huntington. Kim Nolan. Kimberly Nolan.  
- Marshall: Yeah, OK. Then, we didn’t have one in ‘87, because of the meeting in San  Diego connected with the CILTS thing. And we’ve had one every year since then.  Q2: Well, if the objective is to get young people engaged in this so they’re going to  be set on the right path, so to speak…  
- Marshall: That’s kind of drifted away from that. We’re not doing that so much, I’d  say. It has become more, “OK Here’s a topic. Can we get some really good work  done on it?” as against the emphasis on getting people to mingle. Now, we still  would like to have gotten more people from the Hill, but since we’re going to the  Naval War College, this first week or so in August fits the best with their schedule  and so on, and that tends to preclude many people from the Hill, because they  haven’t adjourned by that time.  
- Q2: But you know, given what happened in November [‘94 elections], on your next  one, you might really try much harder to get some young people that haven’t  been up there before and don’t know what’s going on. And maybe you ought to  think about, unlike the last couple of these things, really getting some Hill staff up  there that you can start shaping their minds…  
- Q3: [Indistinct] I don’t know exactly how you would do it, but I was talking to Bill  Kristol. Right now, one of the things he’s doing is he’s placing people in House  staff positions. He says that these guys, in 90 percent of the cases, have just no  foreign policy, no defense policy background, nothing. So it’s a chance, an opportunity.  
- Q4: Something a little tinier than Newport, maybe it could be in the Washington  area [indistinct], if you really wanted to try give them a sense [indistinct], hold it in  Baltimore [indistinct].  
- Q3: Right. But right now, I mean, there’s just… A lot of them are just trying to figure  out, where’s my desk? How do I make the phones work? And they’re almost exclusively concentrating on the “Contract with America.”  Did you want to talk about the bilats [bilateral talks] at all? Any of those things  worth raising? Any of the…  
- Marshall: I don’t think so, especially. About the only thing that’s new during this  period is we start the arrangements with the Japanese in the last year [1988]. That  had come about because of Richard Armitage [Assistant Secretary of Defense for  International Security Affairs], when he more or less replaced Iklé in the last year of the period. He asked me to go and talk with Nishihiro, who was the second  guy in the Japanese Defense Agency, to talk to him about the possibility of some  discussion with them. And then Nishihiro wanted to create something like a net  assessment activity in the Japanese establishment. So we started to do that that  fall, the fall of ‘88. I think I went there initially in August, then we went back in  October, November, something like that.  
- Q2: We had that one little brief thing with the Brits, where they wanted to start a net  assessment activity.  
- Marshall: Well, we’ve had a couple of those, three or four of those, with the Brits. But  there’s nothing particularly notable about those.

## Outline for 25 January 1995 Talk  
### Reagan second term  
1. Underground command centers/costing of, long history of, mid ‘40s—>  ~1–2% of GNP/part of cost of military power/military burden  
2. Earner/strategic planning activity—maybe mid-’50s/papers in office for Guthe  to look at  — Major theme/part of long-term competition focus of Marshall’s intellectual life

- Marshall: There are two aspects of the Reagan second term I thought it would be  important to go back and pick up. Maybe the first thing to do would be to do  that, just to add to the earlier discussion.  As I thought about it, there were two things that we didn’t really talk about. One  was that in the middle of the Reagan period, in part because Bill Earner was here  in the office, we made another effort in this strategic planning notion that James  Roche and I had first worked on in the middle ‘70s. A number of papers were written and some specific areas, particularly tactical air, were discussed. Dick DeLauer  [Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering], who was around at  the time—so this may merge into the last part of the first Reagan term—was very  receptive and we spent a lot of time talking with him.  And there are a whole bunch of papers here. There are at least three bound  volumes of various kind of papers that were written. It also was the background,  in part, for sponsoring research on cost-imposing strategies,35 some continuing  work in that, and things that I think I had Jim Martin do on fleshing out this notion  of long-term competition and strategies for that.36 So there was a whole set of  things that went on that need to be covered.  The second thing that I had forgotten to mention was that one of the things that  came out of the shift in the intelligence community’s focus as a result of PD-59  [Presidential Directive 59] was this discovery, which I think was mentioned last  time, of the various protection constructions for the Soviet elite and so on, but  in particular, the underground command centers that were discovered.37 Also  discovered was their very long history, and the Soviet efforts at concealment and,  in fact, active deception that went along with them.38 And one of the things that  we had done, only partially successfully, was a project that was undertaken jointly  for us by the people in intelligence and at the Defense Nuclear Agency to try to  cost this major effort [Soviet underground facilities]. As I remember, it came out to  be that from the mid‘40s through the mid-‘80s or so, the thing had run at one or  two percent of gross national product, just for that—probably. These are kind of  shaky numbers, but…  
- Q2: Is that the real GNP or the “pseudo” GNP?
- Marshall: No, I think the real GNP.
- Q2: So this is one or two percent of the overall defense burden, which you thought  was between 25 and 33 percent of GNP.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right. Or 35 percent of GNP.  
- Q2: So it was one to two percent out of that.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right. So it was an enormous effort.  
- Q3: Was that incorporated into the formal, published estimates of Soviet defense  burdens?  
- Marshall: No. You see, the Central Intelligence Agency people, I think, never did  these things or didn’t cost them and there was no… I don’t think it’s the kind of  thing they ever really reflected very well in their estimates.  
- Q3: So they didn’t accept it, even when…  
- Marshall: I don’t know. At that point I didn’t care.  Q8: They probably didn’t care either.

* * *

### Endnotes

- 1 Eds: This chapter includes two sections. The first section covers the period from 1985 to 1988  and is an interview conducted on 16 December 1994. The second section also covers the period  from 1985 to 1988, and is excerpted from an interview conducted on 25 January 1995. The  first outline was prepared for the first interview while the second outline is an excerpt of the  relevant sections from the outline prepared for the second interview.  
- 2 Eds: Interview conducted on 16 December 1994.  
- 3 Andrew W. Marshall and Jeffrey S. McKitrick, testimony in “Stenographic Transcript of Hearings before the Committee on Armed Services, United States Senate, Hearings to Receive  Testimony on NATO-Warsaw Pact Military Balance (U),” 4 Feb 1988, SECRET.  
- 4 Andrew W. Marshall in House Armed Services Committee, Competitive Strategies, 101st  Cong., 1st sess. (Washington: GPO, 1989), 2–3, 5–8.  
- 5 A.W. Marshall, Long-Term Competition with the Soviets: A Framework for Strategic Analysis (U),  R-862-PR (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Apr 1972), SECRET. See also A.W. Marshall, Long  Term Competition with the Soviets: A Framework for Strategic Analysis, lN-21542-PR (Santa  Monica: RAND Corp., 15 Apr 1971) (CONFIDENTIAL; Declassified 7 May 1980). Although published in 1972, R-862-PR “was actually written in the period from the summer of  1969 through the end of 1970.”  
- 6 Memo, Caspar W. Weinberger to Secretaries of the Military Departments, Chairman of the  Joint Chiefs of Staff, Under Secretaries of Defense, Assistant Secretaries of Defense, General  Counsel, Assistants to the Secretary of Defense, Directors of Defense Agencies, Commanders-in-Chief of Unified and Specified Commands, subj: FY 1983-87 Defense Guidance (U),  10 Jun 1981, with attachment, “Competing with the Soviet Union in Peacetime (U),” SECRET, 13. See also Memo, Caspar W. Weinberger to Secretaries of the Military Departments,  Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Under Secretaries of Defense, Assistant Secretaries of  Defense, General Counsel, Assistants to the Secretary of Defense, Directors of Defense Agencies, Commanders-in-Chief of Unified and Specified Commands, subj: FY 1984-88 Defense  Guidance (U), 22 Mar 1982, with attachments, “D. U.S. Strengths and Opportunities (U),” 5;  “F. Competing with the Soviet Union in Peacetime (U),” SECRET, 24–26; and Richard Halloran, “Pentagon Draws Up First Strategy For Fighting a Long Nuclear War,” New York Times,  30 May 1982, 1.  
- 7 Memo, Paul Thayer to Secretaries of the Military Departments; Chairman, Joint Chiefs of  Staff, subj: U.S. Weapons Development Policy (U), 10 May 1983, CONFIDENTIAL; Memo,  John Lehman to Deputy Secretary of Defense, subj: U.S. Weapons Development Policy (U)  - Info Memorandum, 18 Jul 1983, SECRET; Memo, Verne Orr to Deputy Secretary of Defense, subj: U.S. Weapons Development Policy (U) - Information Memorandum, 20 Jul 1983,  SECRET.  
- 8 Prepared statement of Graham Allison, in Competitive Strategies, 15; Caspar W. Weinberger,  Department of Defense Annual Report to the Congress for Fiscal Year 1987 (Washington: GPO,  1986), 85–88. For a history of the competitive strategies effort within the Department of  Defense, see David J. Andre, New Competitive Strategies Tools and Methodologies, Vol. I: Review  of the Department of Defense Competitive Strategies Initiative, 1986-1990, SAIC-90/1506 (McLean: Science Applications International Corp., 30 Nov 1990).  
- 9 National Security Strategy of the United States (Washington: GPO, Jan 1987), 20; National Security Strategy of the United States (Washington: GPO, Jan 1988), 39; National Security Strategy of  the United States (Washington: GPO, 90), 24l.  
- 10 On intelligence support for competitive strategies, see New Competitive Strategies Tools and  Methodologies, Vol. I: Review of the Department of Defense Competitive Strategies Initiative, 1986-  1990, 73–76, 131.  
- 11 James G. Roche, “Competitive Strategies and Arms Control” (briefing slides), presentation at  the American Defense Preparedness Association
- 12 The third speaker at the meeting in California, Alan B. Goldstayn (Director, Plans and Programs, DCS/Science and Technology, HQ Air Force Systems Command), gave a talk titled  “New High Leverage Technology Policy” (information from symposium brochure).  
- 13 Assistant Chief of Staff, Studies & Analysis/USAF, subj: The Cost to the USSR to Defense  Against US Low Altitude Penetrators and Cruise Missiles, Time - 1992 (U), 16 Jun 1982,  SECRET when with attachment, “Memo, John M. Porter to Under Secretary of Defense for  Research and Engineering, [no subject], 1 Jun 1982, SECRET, with briefing slides, AOC/OSD  Electronic Warfare Technical Study Committee, “The Cost to U.S.S.R. to Defense Against U.S.  Low Altitude Penetrators and Cruise Missiles, Time - 1992 (U),” 17 May 1982, SECRET.  
- 14 See, for example, Col. V. Alekseyev, “The Pentagon’s ‘Strategies of Rivalry’,” Krasnaya zvezda,  4 May 1988, 3, in Foreign Broadcast Information Service, Daily Report: Soviet Union, FBJS-SOV-88-091, 11 May 1988, 1–2; Lt. Gen. V. Pavlov, “And Now ‘Competitive Strategies…’,”  Krasnaya zvezda, 30 Nov 1988, 5, in FBIS-SOV-88-232, 2 Dec 1988, 1–2; Lt. Gen. Viktor  Starodubov, “From Differing Standpoints,” Pravda, 27 Jan 1989, 7, in FBIS-SOV-89-020, 1  Feb 1989, 4–5; Maj. Gen. Yu. Lebedev and A. Podberezkin, “What Lies Behind the ‘Strategies  of Competition’ Concept?” Krasnaya zvezda, 14 Mar 1989, 3, in Joint Publications Research  Service, Soviet Union: Military Affairs, JPRS-UMA-89-013, 26 May 1989, 62–63; and Col. N.  Ruzayev, “U.S. Military-Political ‘Competitive’ Strategy,” Zarubezhnoye voyennoye obozreniye, no.  8 (Aug 1989): 3–8, in Joint Publications Research Service, Soviet Union: Foreign Military Review, JPRS-UFM-90-001, 18 Jan 1990, 1–4. According to Dennis Kloske, when Secretary of  Defense Frank Carlucci “visited the Soviet Union in August of [1988], [Chief of the General  Staff Sergei Akhromeyev and [Minister of Defense Dmitry] Yazov pointed out to him, [on]  top of all the modernization carried out in NATO the introduction of competitive strategies  was, quote, ‘unfair’.’’ Competitive Strategies, 61.  
- 15 Robert McFarlane claims in his memoirs that during his tenure as President Reagan’s Assistant  for National Security Affairs he viewed the SDI “as a bargaining chip—the President never  would have conceded that, he really meant to build this shield—but that was its primary value  at the time, a means of imposing a fearsome financial burden on the Soviets and leveraging  their behavior at the bargaining table. And this is precisely the effect that SDI had.” Robert  McFarlane and Zofia Smardz, Special Trust (New York: Cadell & Davies, 1994), 234.  
- 16 Fred Charles Iklé, “Can Nuclear Deterrence Last Out the Century?” Foreign Affairs 51, no. 2  (Jan 1973): 267–285.  
- 17 “The criteria by which we will judge the feasibility of [defensive] technologies will be demanding. The technologies must produce defensive systems that are survivable; if not, the defenses  would themselves be tempting targets for a first strike. They would decrease rather than enhance stability.” “New defensive technologies must also be cost-effective at the margin—that is,  they must be cheap enough to add additional defensive capability so that the other side has no  incentive to add additional offensive capability to overcome the defense. If this criterion is not  met, the defensive systems could encourage a proliferation of countermeasures and additional  offensive weapons to overcome deployed defenses instead of a redirection of effort from offense  to defense.” Paul H. Nitze, Address before the World Affairs Council in Philadelphia, 20 Feb  1985, in Department of State Bulletin 85, no. 2097 (Apr 1985): 28. These criteria later were  incorporated in Presidential guidance on the SDI program. See National Security Decision  Directive 172, subj: Presenting the Strategic Defense Initiative, 30 May 1985 (SECRET; Sanitized 27 Nov 1992) NSDD 172, National Security Decision Directives, Box 2, Records of the  National Security Council, Record Group 273, National Archives.  
- 18 Glenn A. Kent and Randall J. DeValk, Strategic Defenses and the Transition to Assured Survival, R-3369-AF (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Oct 1986); Dean Wilkening and Kenneth  Watman, Strategic Defense and First-Strike Stability, R-3412-FF/RC (Santa Monica: RAND  Corp., Nov 1986); Dean Wilkening, Kenneth Watman, Michael Kennedy, and Richard  Darilek, Strategic Defenses and Crisis Stability, N-2511-AF (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Apr  1989); Glenn A. Kent and David E. Thaler, First-Strike Stability and Strategic Defenses: Part II  of a Methodology for Evaluating Strategic Forces, R-3918-AF (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Oct  1990).
- 19 A.W. Marshall, “A Program to Improve Analytic Methods related to Strategic Forces,” Policy  Sciences 15, no. 1 (Nov 1982): 47–50.  
- 20 For a discussion of how the RSAS has been used, see Bruce Bennett, Daniel Fox, Carl Jones,  Lawrence S. Painter, John Schrader, Robert Weissler, and Bruce Wilson, RSAS 4.6 Summary,  N-3534-NA (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 1992), 13–17.  
- 21 Discriminate Deterrence, Report of the Commission on Integrated Long-Term Strategy (Fred  C. Iklé and Albert Wohlstetter, Co-Chairmen) (Washington: GPO, Jan 1988); Commitment to  Freedom: Security Assistance as a U.S. Policy Instrument in the Third World, Paper by the Regional  Conflict Working Group (Paul F. Gorman, Chairman) (Washington: Department of Defense,  May 1988); Supporting U.S. Strategy for Third World Conflict, Report by the Regional Conflict  Working Group (Washington: Department of Defense, Jun 1988); The Future of Containment:  America’s Options for Defending Its Interest on the Soviet Periphery, Report by the Offense-Defense Working Group (Fred S. Hoffman and Henry S. Rowen, Chairmen) (Washington: Department of Defense, Oct 1988); Extended-Range Smart Conventional Weapon Systems, Paper  by the Standoff Weapons Panel, Offense-Defense Working Group (Washington: Department  of Defense, Oct 1988); Technology for National Security, Report by the Working Group on  Technology (Charles Herzfeld, Chairman) (Washington: Department of Defense, Oct 1988);  Recommended Changes in U.S. Military Space Policies and Programs, Paper by the Working  Group on Technology (Washington: Department of Defense, Oct 1988); Sources of Change in  the Future Security Environment, Paper by the Future Security Environment Working Croup  (Andrew W. Marshall and Charles Wolf, Chairmen) (Washington: Department of Defense,  Apr 1988); The Future Security Environment, Report of the Future Security Environment  Working Group (Washington: Department of Defense, Oct 1988).  
- 22 The Future Security Environment, 6–7, 92–95.  
- 23 Charles Wolf, Jr., K.C. Yeh, Edmund Brunner, Jr., Aaron Gunvitz, and Marilee Lawrence, The  Costs of the Soviet Empire, R-3073/1-NA (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Sep 1983); Charles  Wolf, Jr., Keith Crane, K.C. Yeh, Susan Anderson, and Ed Brunner, The Costs and Benefits of  the Soviet Empire, 1981-1983, R-3419-NA (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Aug 1986); Charles  Wolf, Jr., “The Costs and Benefits of the Soviet Empire,” in Henry S. Rowen and Charles  Wolf, Jr., eds., The Future of the Soviet Empire (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1987), 121–140.  
- 24 Anders Åslund, “How Small Is Soviet National Income?” in Henry S. Rowen and Charles  Wolf, Jr., eds., The Impoverished Superpower: Perestroika and the Soviet Military Burden (San  Francisco: Institute for Contemporary Studies, 1990), 13–61; and Anders Åslund, Gorbachev’s  Struggle for Economic Reform: The Soviet Reform Process, 1985-1988 (Ithaca: Cornell University  Press, 1989).  
- 25 The Impoverished Superpower: Perestroika and the Soviet Military Burden (“This book developed  from a conference held at the Hoover Institution on March 22–24, 1988, on the role of the  defense sector in the Soviet economy,” v.).  
- 26 Ministry of Defense, Federal Republic of Germany, Military Planning of the Warsaw Pact in  Central Europe: A Study, Feb 1992, translated by Mark Kramer and reprinted in Cold War  International History Project Bulletin, no. 2 (Fall 1992): 1, 13–19; Harald Nielsen, “The East  German Armed Forces in Warsaw Pact Nuclear Operations,” prepared for Sandia National  Laboratories, Jul 1993; Harald Nielsen, “Employment and Handling of Nuclear Weapons in  the Warsaw Pact,” prepared for Sandia National Laboratories, Jun 1994.  
- 27 Goldwater-Nichols Department of Defense Reorganization Act of 1986, Public Law 99-433,  1 Oct 1986, Title II, Part A, Section 201.  
- 28 President’s Blue Ribbon Commission on Defense Management, A Quest for Excellence, Final  Report to the President (Washington: GPO, Jun 1986), xix, 12–13, 15, 18–20; Appendix, 5,  7. On the implementation of the Commission’s recommendation regarding net assessment,  see Office of the White House Press Secretary, Fact Sheet: Summary of a Directive Implementing the Recommendations of the Blue Ribbon Commission on Defense Management,  2 Apr 1986, 1–2, NSDD 219, National Security Decision Directives, Box 2, Records of the  National Security Council, Record Group 273, National Archives; National Security Decision  Directive 219, subj: Implementation of the Recommendations of the President’s Commission on Defense Management (U), Memo, Fred C. lklé to Director, Joint Staff, OJCS, subj: Implementation of Recommendations of the President’s Commission on Defense Management, 15  May 1987, with attachment, Memo, William H. Taft TV to Under Secretary of Defense for  Policy and Director, Joint Staff, subj: Implementation of Recommendations of the President’s  Commission on Defense Management, 4 May 1987; Memo, Vice Adm. P.F. Carter, Jr., USN  to [?], subj: Implementation of Recommendations of the President’s Commission on Defense  Management, 29 May 1987, DJSM-1075-87.  
- 29 See prepared statement of Adm. William Crowe, in Senate Armed Services Committee, Department of Defense Authorization for Appropriations for Fiscal Year 1989, Part 1, 100th Cong.,  2nd sess. (Washington: GPO, 1988), 40–59 (18 Feb 1988). This statement includes both an  unclassified version of the “first in-depth net assessment” by the Joint Staff (43–54) and a “risk  assessment” (57).  
- 30 Memo, Anthony H. Cordesman to Sen. John McCain, subj: Developing an Adequate Net Assessment for Use by the Congress, 24 Feb 1988; Letter, Sen. John McCain to Frank Carlucci,  16 Feb 1988.  
- 31 In early 1987, a few months after the passage of the Goldwater-Nichols Department of Defense Reorganization Act, which made the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff responsible  for performing net assessments, Admiral Crowe, in testifying before a number of congressional  committees, submitted an unclassified prepared statement that included his net assessment of  the East-West balance in six categories: “Strategic Forces,” “Maritime,” “NATO/Warsaw Pact,”  “East Asia,” “Power Projection,” and “Special Operations Forces.” He characterized this analysis as “my own personal assessment” rather than that of the Joint Staff. This statement was submitted first to the Senate Budget Committee on 13 Jan 1987. See Senate Budget Committee,  Concurrent Resolution on the Budget for Fiscal Year 1988, Vol. II, 100th Cong., 1st sess. (Washington: GPO, 1987), 145–151. The statement also can be found in House Budget Committee,  Review of Budget Proposals for Fiscal Year 1988, Part 1, 100th Cong., 1st sess. (Washington:  GPO, 1987), 151–157 (21 Jan 1987); Senate Armed Services Committee, National Security  Strategy, 100th Cong., 1st sess. (Washington: GPO, 1987), 402–405 (21 Jan 87); House Appropriations Committee, Department of Defense Appropriations for 1988, Part 1, 100th Cong.,  1st sess. (Washington: GPO, 1987), 61–64 (4 Feb 1987); House Armed Services Committee,  Defense Department Authorization And Oversight, 100th Cong., 1st sess. (Washington: GPO,  1987), 46–51 (24 Mar 1987); and Senate Appropriations Committee, Department of Defense  Appropriations for Fiscal Year 1988, Part 4, 100th Cong., 1st sess. (Washington: GPO, 1988),  353–357 (19 May 1987).  
- 32 Memo, Lt. Gen. Robert W. RisCassi to Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security  Affairs), subj: Release of JCS/Joint Staff Planning Data, 12 Jul 1988, DJSM-1758-88.  
- 33 R&D Associates, Summer Study on Strategic Policy (U), RDA-TR-132903-001 (Marina Del  Rey: R&D Associates, Jan 1986), SECRET.  
- 34 Excerpted from an interview conducted 25 January 1995. The remainder of the interview covered  the George H.W. Bush and William Clinton Administrations and can be found in Chapter 7.  
- 35 Enhancement of the Efficiency of U.S. Military Programs Through the Application of “Cost- Imposing” Strategies (U), DSA Report 485 (Arlington: Decision-Science Applications, 24 Jun 1983),  SECRET (executive summary only); Cruise missile Cost-Imposing Effectiveness: A Case Study of  the Impact of the U.S. Air Launched Cruise Missile (ALCM) on Soviet Air Defense Costs (U) (Arlington: Decision-Science Applications, date?), SECRET; G.E. Pugh and R.R. Hubbard, Cost  Imposing Effectiveness of an Attack RPV: A Case Study of a Remotely Piloted Airframe for Ground  Combat Support, Partial Draft (includes summary of findings and conclusions only), DSA Report 521 (Arlington: Decision-Science Applications, Jan 1985).  
- 36 J.J. Martin et al., The U.S.-Soviet Long-Term Competition, Vol. I: Concepts; Vol. II: Planning and Analysis; Vol. III: Appendices (San Diego: Science Applications International Corp., 5 Jun 1990).  
- 37 Desmond Ball and Robert C. Toth, “Revising the SIOP: Taking War-Fighting to Dangerous  Extremes,” International Security 14, no. 4 (Spring 1990): 73–75; Department of Defense, Soviet Military Power: An Assessment of the Threat, 1988 (Washington: GPO, 1988), 59–62.  
- 38 Kenneth E. deGraffenreid, “The Art of Deception,” Global Affairs 4, no. 4 (Fall 1989): 168.