## Introduction ##

The election of George H.W. Bush was viewed by many as signaling an extension  of the national security policy of Ronald Reagan, under whom Bush served as vice  president. But Bush was immediately confronted with Chinese repression of civil  unrest, exemplified by the use of military force against civilians at Tiananmen Square  in June 1989. In addition to condemning the response of the Chinese leadership,  the United States and the European Union imposed an embargo on arms sales to  China, and the subsequent growth of political and economic ties with China slowed.  The United States faced a new problem when Saddam Hussein’s Iraq invaded  Kuwait in August 1990. Bush quickly assembled an international coalition of forces  to expel the Iraqi forces in Operation Desert Storm in 1991, but the first Gulf War led  to the years-long deployment of U.S. forces to the region.  At the same time, Bush had to deal with the ongoing collapse of the Warsaw  Pact. Free elections were held in Hungary in March 1990, and in Czechoslovakia  in June. East and West Germany reunified in October 1990, and Lech Walesa was  elected president of Poland in December. The dissolution of the Soviet Union  continued, with the final transfer of power from Mikhail Gorbachev to Boris Yeltsin  in December 1991. Yeltsin busied himself with trying to shift to a free-enterprise  economy and a democratic government—both efforts were doomed to failure.  The START I treaty with the Soviet Union, reducing strategic nuclear weapons, had  been signed in July 1991. It was followed shortly by Bush’s Presidential Nuclear  Initiative in September, which called for unilaterally withdrawing tactical nuclear  weapons from overseas American forces and U.S. Navy ships. Gorbachev, in one  of his last official acts, made a similar pledge of tactical nuclear force reductions in  the Soviet Armed Forces, a pledge Yeltsin reaffirmed when he came to power.  William Clinton came to the Presidency with little experience in foreign affairs. He  inherited a humanitarian mission in Somalia from the Bush Administration that  quickly turned sour as American soldiers were dragged through the streets of  Mogadishu, the Somali capital. The resulting outcry from the American people led  to the resignation of Defense Secretary Les Aspin. 

Clinton sought to promote a policy of “enlargement” designed to work through  international organizations as much as possible and avoid American unilateralism.Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic joined NATO and Russia was persuaded  to withdraw its forces from Estonia and Latvia.  Despite his desire to avoid U.S. unilateralism, in 1996 Clinton deployed two  aircraft carriers to the vicinity of Taiwan in response to the People’s Republic of  China’s attempt to intimidate Taiwan by shooting missiles into the waters around  the island.  During Clinton’s presidency he was forced to spend a great deal of time addressing problems in the Balkans. The break-up of Yugoslavia in the early 1990s created  six separate countries and produced regional instability. Serbian atrocities against  Bosnian civilians eventually led to NATO bombing of Serb positions, a situation  that only escalated over the years until Clinton sent in 20,000 American troops  as part of a NATO deployment. A US-led operation in 1999—Operation Allied  Force—eventually brought relative peace to the region.

## Outline for 25 January 1995 Talk 

[Note: Italicized items were not discussed during the interview.]  

### Bush/Clinton  

1. Revolution in military affairs work begins about ‘90/’91  
2. Shift in focus of office  
3. Endgame  
4. Monitoring USSR Chapter 11, especially for Cheney  
5. Wolfowitz success in managing Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for  Policy—Bridge Game effort
6. Desert Storm  
    — Summer Study antecedent/New problems in deterrence 
    — French story  
    — Early games/Mark Herman  
    — Panels for Paul Wolfowitz/Harry Rowen  
    — War termination effort/Fred Iklé  
        • C3I modeling/Mark Herman  
### Bush/Clinton other themes  

1. Gaskin/Korean balance [saga?]  
    — Marshall’s view  
        • Good on our problems (inspector general)  
        • Weak on North/Intelligence problem  
    — Suppression/Carl Ford  
        • Political hot potato  
        • Consequences  
2. Office focus  
    — Northern Flank ([_____?]/Air Force officer)  
    — Power projection  
    — Korea  
    — NATO-Warsaw Pact/wrap-up  
    — Military-technical revolution  — Soviet Union Chapter 11  
3. Office problems  
    — Gaskin—>other Air Force officer ([_____?])/[ Ceil?]/fill in/Jo Ann Koerner Xmas ‘90  

### Jeff McKitrick with Quayle  

1. Andy Krepinevich replaces to take up NATO-Warsaw Pact Balance (mid-’89)  — One assessment  — Start new modeling/meeting engagement (Information war aspects)  
2. Andy Krepinevich then shifted to military-technical revolution effort in early  ‘90—>Jul ‘92 assessment  

### Cheney/Wolfowitz  

1. Soviet Union Chapter 11/Scooter Libby/State guy  
2. Early meeting—Jim Roche, Paul Wolfowitz, Steve Hadley  
3. New focus of competitive strategies. Gouré/strategic competence (failure)  
4. Bridge Club effort  
    — Good  
    — Nuclear failure (Marshall’s view/no progress since ‘50s)

## 1989–1993 

- Marshall: Let me begin. The idea is to talk about the Bush and Clinton periods, and  talk mainly about the Bush period.  The first thing is to say that the Bush period was very favorable for the office,  principally because of Paul Wolfowitz [Under Secretary of Defense for Policy]. In  the first place, Wolfowitz was the first person to have that job who got to choose  his own deputies. And it really ran as a team. Also, my own past association with  him, and everything, just made everything really work really very, very well.  Indeed, when he was offered the thing, he called me up to ask whether he should  take the job. Well, he talked to Jim Roche and me, and, actually, I suppose, other  people. Jim and I had some meetings with him prior to him actually coming on  board to tell him what our view of the world was and so on. A lot of it came out of  the Future Security Environment stuff that had been finished shortly before that.3  And then, also, Paul had Roche prepare for him a plan for the organization and  function of the whole thing.  Another thing that happened was this issue of what to do about the competitive  strategies effort. A group of people was put together to look at that. A proposal  was made that Daniel Gouré was to head the thing up. Some good ideas were put  forward as to how it ought to be refocused, but it fundamentally failed, I think. I  didn’t pay enough attention to know exactly why, but it never quite made much  progress on some of the things that were proposed to it.  
- Q2: I think there were a couple of things involved. One was that I think Dan really  turned out not really to be the right guy for the thing.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q2: It’s not clear anybody could have done it at that time. But Gouré is really a much  more policy-oriented kind of guy, than trying to think more long term. The other  thing is, at that point in time, it was very, very difficult, because you had the whole  transition with the Soviet Union, etc., and so, what did you do about all that, and  how did you change the competitive strategy initiative if your main competitor was  evolving or changing or maybe, as some said, going away. So Gouré had this sort of  competitive strategy portfolio with no competitor. So there were these meetings…  
- Marshall: It took a long time to get agreement that, in fact, the thing would continue, and kind of a rump thing was kept in existence.  
- Q2: Right. And there were these sessions that eventually made the recommendation to Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney—  
- Marshall: Right, right. We had a session with Cheney.  Q2: —to keep the thing going. But there was this off-line, ad hoc group, that I guess  you were the nominal co-chair of with Jim Roche, with Michael Duval…  
- Marshall: Yeah, Duval and Graham Allison.  
- Q2: And initially Lieutenant General [Air Force] Lee Butler came, but then he ended  up sending a brigadier in his place. 
- Marshall: Yeah.  Q2: Butler was the J-5 [Director for Strategic Plans and Policy, Joint Staff] at the time.  And [William] Cockell was supposed to be involved in the thing, but he never  could quite make it out from the West Coast.  
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q2: But the notion was, “How do you change all this, or should you even keep it  going?” So the recommendation went to Cheney to keep it going.  
- Marshall: And to refocus it.  
- Q2: Refocus the effort, etc. But then, I think that nobody ever got a new focus that  was sufficiently compelling to keep the initiative going the way that it had been  when you had this real peer competitor out there like the Soviet Union to focus  on. So, it got caught up in the circumstances, never really got a new raison d’être  that allowed it to keep going, although we did keep putting the words in the  National Security Strategy of the United States report,4 that the National Security  Council and the President put together, and then put it in the Defense Department annual report, and those kinds of things. But there really wasn’t much there.  We couldn’t really figure out what to do with it. And then I think, eventually, it  devolved in this reconstitution thing. Being able to reconstitute our forces faster  than potential emerging competitors, which I think really wasn’t a very useful way  to think about it. The mobilization guys in the Department, seemed to me, got  their hands on it and it just kind of withered away into nothingness.  
- Marshall: Right. During the Bush years, we had an abortive effort to relook at the  Northern Flank. We continued to do some looking at power projection. We did  a new assessment of Korea that I’ll come back to, the Robert Gaskin thing. Andy  Krepinevich replaced Jeff McKitrick, with the initial idea that he was going to  continue the Warsaw Pact thing, but within a year, there was a wrap-up effort that  was undertaken to understand what had happened to the balance as the result  of the change of status of the Soviet forces in Eastern Europe. We also did work  related to the beginning of the more evident breaking up or coming down of the  Soviet Union, the Soviet Union “Chapter 11.” And then there was the start-up of  this effort on the MTR [military-technical revolution], which began probably in  mid-‘89, I would think.  The first thing to talk a little bit about is this Soviet Union Chapter 11. The main  pitch I made to Paul Wolfowitz, even before he took over, was, “Look, the Soviet  Union is in real trouble.” I used to use chess analogues of …  
- Q3: Middle game [indistinct].  
- Marshall: Yeah. “We’ve emerged from the middle game with a won game. Now  the big thing is not to screw it up, but really be astute. That’s the frame of mind  people ought to be in. And it’s not only that we have a [indistinct] won game,  we have a tremendous advantage.” This view was based on my feeling that most  of the people in the U.S. government didn’t understand that and, secondly, that  the nature of the changes likely to be taking place, although they all happened  much more rapidly than I ever expected at that time, was such that you shouldn’t count on President Mikhail Gorbachev being there or any of the people that you  were talking with or dealing with being there. And I probably kept going back to  things that I was saying in the middle ‘80s to Dennis Ross, that you ought to think  of yourself as talking to Louis XVI’s ministers, and that relationships you might develop might not last too long, because they might not be there too much longer.  I don’t know that any of that had too much effect, but I think Paul was convinced  and took it seriously.  Of the things that were done during the Bush period, in terms of assessments, I’d  say only two, maybe the beginning of the third thing… But one was the Korean  case that we looked at. And the second was the stuff that ended up with the first  MTR assessment in July of ‘92. So let me talk about the Korean thing…I guess the  other thing we were looking at was how proliferation would change the character  of the power projection problem, and we did do some things, gaming and so on  concerning that. But the two big things, I guess, were the Korean assessment and  the MTR thing.  The Korean thing really came about because Gaskin— It was appropriate to  pick it up because, again, we had this pattern of after people either not watching closely enough or finally they were looking closely all the time, but it finally  became clear to them that the North Koreans had gone through a whole new  period of investment and change, and that significant improvements had taken  place in their force posture.  
- Q2: Did this come out of a National Intelligence Estimate or something?  
- Marshall: No, it was some work by some guys in the Defense Intelligence Agency,  fundamentally. And we came to know about that, and Gaskin, who had served, I  guess, a couple of times in Korea, was very interested, and so volunteered to pick  up that and do an assessment.  The assessment, I thought, always had far too much this character of an inspector  general’s report, rather than a real assessment, because it was heavy on the problems on our side. I kept pushing Gaskin about, “What are their problems?” and  to get it more even-balanced, but was never fully successful. He always had the  excuse, “Well, we don’t know enough about them and some of their things.” That’s  true in a way, but nonetheless, it had this fairly aggressive inspector general-like  aspect to much of it, which I got toned down as much as I could. Maybe I could  have persevered and got it toned down still further. But I thought that he did turn  up some really interesting stuff.  Now, the assessment was extremely unwelcomed.  
- Q8: You’re thinking of Carl Ford [indistinct].  
- Marshall: Carl Ford [Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs], well…  
- Q8: Who had worked on this project while he was in earlier jobs. He was a stakeholder.  
- Marshall: There’s that, but also he was a stakeholder for a different reason in that in  the early part of the Bush Administration, there was some pressure on Capitol Hill to withdraw more troops from Korea, and a big defense had been put up by the  Administration about why that wasn’t a good idea. And there also was this overall  strategy that was supposed to be developed for Asia, and it was very awkward to  have an assessment whose major message was that the South Koreans really  weren’t trying very hard.5 On the one hand, there were these new developments  that the North had gone through—the repositioning of the forces, the great  increase in artillery, and a number of other things—to which the South had not  really responded. Instead, the South was off starting to build a submarine fleet  and other naval things to deal with its real and future enemy, the Japanese, or  whoever else in the region they were focused on. And so, the assessment was  very unwelcome.  It was not entirely suppressed, but it had very limited distribution. It went to the  Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and General Robert RisCassi, who was about  to go out and take command of U.S. forces in Korea, got a copy and read it, and  talked with both Gaskin and myself, and he took it very seriously. And it had an  impact, both in terms of, I think, some things that RisCassi did when he was out  there, and also certainly his request for a relook at the whole plan and so on, and  some modifications were made in the war plans to beef up the forces and so on.  When it was sent out, I put a memo on top of it which pointed out what I thought  was the main import of the thing. In the first place, this thing just dealt with the  conventional kind of attack, and I guess the first thing I mentioned was that  these people may have, somewhere along the line, nuclear weapons and that’s  something we need to be thinking about, and so the thing is not the whole story  about what the situation is there. Secondly, I wrote that I found the story of the  South’s limited response to what the North was doing, and indeed the whole  orientation of their efforts, to suggest that the South was, in fact, much like our  other feckless allies, relying on us to deter the opponent, while they didn’t do the  things they ought to do to fully play their role and their part. I said that this was  not a novel problem, because we’d been through that in Europe and the outcome  had been OK, but it was a dangerous game. Therefore, in the current situation, on  the one hand, we ought to be talking to the South and trying to motivate them  to do what they should do to deal with the threat. On the other hand, we should  be focusing a lot on the issue of how we, in fact, deter the North. And that’s not  so much a matter of bringing in necessarily additional ground forces or so on, but  what threats are important, how do we influence their calculations sorts of thing.  They don’t do it, because in the longer run, the whole game is running against  them for economic and other reasons.  My belief is that nothing at this level ever happened. I don’t know that there was  any effort to really seriously deal with the South and say, “What the hell are you  doing spending your money the way you’re doing?” I’m not sure that we did things  to increase deterrence, although I did have a long discussion with Wolfowitz  about that, because there were some things that I’d known about in the past. In  the late ‘70s or so [Jul 1979], I remember General John Wickham, who was then  commander out there, had talked to me about, when I visited him—the only time  I’ve ever been in Korea—about various actions that were being taken to impress  on the North the capabilities that we might employ and so on, possibilities of deception, a whole bunch of other things that could be used, and that people  ought to be being imaginative about that. But I have no idea whether anything  ever came of that.  
- Q3: These discussions were Wickham’s…had some things to do with the presence  of B-52s over Korea at the time of the tree-cutting incident [Aug 1976]?6  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q3: And his observations about North Korean reactions to that?  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q2: RisCassi says that one of the first things he did when he got over there was he  asked to see the war plan. And he took a look at the war plan and he said, “This is  great, it doesn’t say anything about how we’re going to win the war.” And so he  told his war planners to go back and construct a war plan in which the political-military objective was not just for the restoration of the status quo ante (even  that was not made an explicit objective in the existing plans), but was, in fact, reunification of the Korean peninsula.7 And he said it was interesting, because when  they did that and rewrote the war plan, it came out to be a totally different kind  of war plan than the kind that he had when he walked in there. He told me this  as he left being Commander in Chief, ROK/U.S. Combined Forces Command, but I  don’t know if you had any discussions with him as to the nature of the changes he  made in his war plans over there or how that might have related to this.  
- Marshall: No. I heard a little bit about that. I did have lunch with him when he was  retired, in fact, about a year ago or so, when all of this thing flared up again, got  leaked by Gaskin, among others, I suppose.8 I wanted to talk with him just to ask  him how he felt about what the real state of the situation was, because one of the  other things, you see, that came out clearly was our limited intelligence about the  North, and the whole issue really in the end came…well, anyway, one thing that  would be very important would be, “How well do you think these guys are really  going to fight?” And—  
- Q2: Actually, that was a question about both sides, wasn’t it?  
- Marshall: Well, but you see, you had a lot of this evidence that maybe the South  wasn’t going to do very well. On the other hand, what are you going to assume  about the North? Are they going to be very effective? If you’re dealing with the  equipment of the panzer divisions, you’re in a hell of a lot of trouble. And on the  other hand, if you’re dealing with…[gap for tape change] …skills and so on, that’s  another thing. So I wanted to talk to RisCassi about that.  One of the things we did after the assessment was done was we met with people  in the intelligence community, both from CIA and the National Security Agency,  to see what could be done to try to increase our information about the North.  And it really all came down to the ground forces and the special operations  forces. The air force, it’s clear, is terrible. They don’t fly very much and so on. It  really comes down to, “What’s the operational effectiveness of the North’s ground  forces?” And, in fact, I don’t think that that’s an impossible task, to say something  about the existing bases, which really were limited. I don’t think things have gotten any better. I haven’t looked at it, but I don’t think so. Part of my reason  for having lunch with RisCassi was to just get his judgment about what he really  thought about that.  
- Q2: I know one of the other things that RisCassi did while he was over there was he  had this massive improvement effort, which really became a model for most of  the theater commanders, on a C4I [command, control, communications, computers, and intelligence] architecture, because he was convinced that he was going  to have to do all this on the move, on the run, from the get-go. He was going to  have to flow the force from CONUS [Eds: the continental United States] that he  needed to fight and win the war over there, at the same time that he was fighting  and trying not to lose a war over there. So he developed a seamless architecture  from CONUS to Korea that allowed him to fight on the move, because he really  didn’t feel that the in-place forces he had over there were going to be sufficient  and adequate to actually win the war and achieve these new wartime objectives  of the reunification of Korea.  
- Marshall: Right. And I think some changes were made in the pace of reinforcement,  or they hoped for that. So at any rate, that’s one of the—  
- Q2: It may be one of the few instances, actually, or at least one of the few identifiable instances, where one of your assessments directly affected—  
- Marshall: Right. 
- Q2: —a CINC [theater commander in chief] OPLAN [operation plan], force structure,  key elements of the force structure, reinforcement plan, etc. I don’t know of any  other case—  
- Marshall: No…  
- Q2: —with the possible exception of the stuff you did on antisubmarine warfare.  
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q2: But that wasn’t really a theater campaign plan. That was a smaller-scale thing.  
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q2: So this may be one of the few cases where there was a direct effect on a CINC  OPLAN and force structure.  
- Marshall: Right.  Before we go to the MTR thing, one of the things that happened in the wrapping  up of the NATO-Warsaw Pact effort was that where the initial effort was to just  look at what had happened as a result of the withdrawals, or what would be the  case when the Soviet forces had withdrawn from Eastern Europe and the reductions had taken place and so on, we also wanted to look at future contingencies.  That led to a major investment at BDM in modeling, which also was an effort to…  because you wanted to look at a different kind of engagement, in effect, a large  meeting engagement in the middle of Poland. And it also was, if you looked into  the future, to look at the role of reconnaissance-strike complexlike systems, longrange systems that would begin engaging targets before the forces themselves  actually got very close to one another. And, in fact, we knew from the Russian writings that they had talked about this new phase in the engagement of…what  did they call it? “Range fires,” I guess.  
- Q2: “Range fires”?  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q2: Talking about “maneuvering fires”?  
- Marshall: No. I mean just this whole notion that as the forces closed, they would  become engaged through these longer-range fires, and attrition would begin  before the forces came to meet. So instead of the forces starting up against one  another, now you had to take account of this fact that…  
- Q2: Long-range fires could engage and attrit before the ground forces even engaged.  
- Marshall: Yeah, before they engaged. So this was one phase. Then there was the  actual meeting engagement, and then the close engagement of the forces.  
- Q2: In fact, your meeting engagement in the middle of Poland ended up being a  Defense Planning Guidance scenario and a kind of a cause célèbre in The New York  Times, didn’t it? Remember when that DPG scenario leaked [Patrick Tyler], as it always  does, and this thing about this battle in the middle of Poland was a big issue.9  
- Marshall: Could have been. Right. Also, the attempt was made, I think for the first  time, to build in to this model some of the information aspects of this engagement. Because if you’re going to have these long-range fires, one of the things  that needs to be reflected is the degree to which one side or the other would be  better at that, of finding targets, and also of knowing where the other forces really  were as the meeting engagement came about.  
- Q2: Who did that?  
- Marshall: That was built into the thing, and I think we played several…  
- Q2: Built into BDM’s [model]?  
- Marshall: Yes, right. And, in fact, we got the SOLIC [special operations and low-intensity conflict] people involved, because one of the ways in which information  might be obtained was not through sensor systems, but that [special operations].  So anyway, that was one of the good things that happened.  I started to talk with Krepinevich about the MTR, again, coming out of the middle  ‘80s stuff on the future security environment [for the Commission on Integrated  Long-Term Strategy]. So he began to look at that, as I said, probably in mid-‘89 or  certainly by early ‘90, and put out the assessment in ‘92.  From the beginning, I made a decision that we were going to do that assessment  in a very, very different way. The usual thing had been that the assessments were  done really in-house, just by people in this office and with inputs from the outside  of various sorts. But because it seemed to me that if you really thought of this  as the beginning of a period of major change, like the early ‘20s, we ought to  conduct this thing in a way that tended to co-opt people, and we would be in the  process of generating a vocabulary that we wanted to be adopted. And so, totally  differently than we’d done any other assessments, it was done through a series of panels. So people were addressing various topic areas and so on, such as, “What  are the technologies which you think are going to be important? How might  warfare change? Here are the Russian ideas, what ideas do people have?” So it  was conducted, as I say, in a very, very different way.  
- Q2: What was your plan for the allies?  
- Marshall: I didn’t have any plan for the allies. The critical questions really were,  “Do you really feel that we’re in one of these periods where there will be major  changes?” In other words, are the Russians right when they say that we’re in this  new period of a military-technical revolution? Then, “Why has it happened?” What  are the technologies or other things that will lead to changes? Are we at the  beginning, middle, or end of this process? Is the thing mostly over, or are we at  the very beginning? So we posed those questions, and a number of others which  we didn’t answer very well, like, “Who else is going to be involved in this? What  should our strategy be?” Various things of that sort. And one of the purposes of  going for these kind of panel discussions was to get a sense of how widely shared  was some judgment that, in fact, we’re in such a period. Because if that were so,  then in some sense, the main issue would be, “How do you make people take seriously what it is you ought to do if you really are in such a period?” And my feeling  now is that those people tend to sign up to the fact that you’re in such a period,  but then don’t draw very striking conclusions as to what you ought to do. But as  to the allies, that matter emerged as we got around to really writing the assessment, and when we came to the issues, it was really one of the four major issues  that we surfaced for people to really start thinking about, which hasn’t happened,  at least on that. So…  
- Q2: Who does the assessment go to?  
- Marshall: The assessment initially went to people like Wolfowitz, to the heads of the  Services… One of the things, again, that was striking to me was that I expected  that we would have a lot of resistance and flak, but we didn’t actually encounter  that much. I was surprised at the degree to which people tended to agree that  we were probably in such a period, but since implicitly you would be threatening  platforms that people currently love and other things, I thought we would have a  lot more overt resistance—I’m sure that we have lots of foot-dragging and other  things.  The other thing that struck me was that the top-level people often were quite  supportive. Indeed General Gordon Sullivan [Army Vice Chief of Staff at the time]  had somebody call down and asked to see me. My guess is that that probably  would have been, say, the summer of ‘91. And, in fact, his office and the people  who support him didn’t ever seem to get it through their minds that it was that  he wanted to see me, because they kept calling down here about what it was that  I wanted to talk to him about. And all I knew was that he wanted to see me. They  wanted to know, was there a read-ahead? Was there this, was there that so they  could prepare him. So I went there, and he by that time knew that we were working on the MTR assessment, I guess because the Army guys had been involved in  a number of these panels that we were running. What he had to say to me was  that he was very supportive, and, in fact, asked, “What could the Army do? How could he help me?” and so on. And then a little later—probably in very late ‘91  or early ‘92—General Merrill McPeak [Air Force Chief of Staff] called up, made an  appointment, and came to see me in my office. He’s the only Chief of Staff who’s  ever done that. He said he wanted to be the point of contact in the Air Force for  whatever it was I was doing, and that he was very supportive and so on. So I’d been  struck by the support from top-level people. Or somebody like Rear Admiral William  Owens [later promoted to four star and appointed Vice Chairman of the JCS]—he  was Cheney’s military assistant—was always very supportive all along and helpful. So at the very top level you had an amazing and favorable kind of response.  
- Q2: Then again, recall Sullivan’s comments about, “We’re downsizing too fast.”  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q2: “We got all these Serb hordes. We’re kicking people out of the Army left and right.  You don’t know who the threat is. I can’t really ask the Army to get engaged in  an RMA right now because it will break them. They just can’t handle it. That’s one  more straw they can’t handle. So I’m going to try to get through the transition  period and the next guy will have to worry about RMA.”  
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q2: So he took it on board intellectually, but he wasn’t prepared to do anything  bureaucratically to change the Army in that direction.  
- Marshall: Yes, right.  
- Q2: And in fact, you recall last year, he had gotten wind, I guess as a result of the  Army roundtable that we had down at the Training and Doctrine Command, that  there was some disappointment on your—  
- Marshall: Yes [indistinct].  
- Q2: —or at least he viewed that as meaning you were disappointed that he hadn’t  done much, so he wanted to talk to you and reassure you that he still thought  this was very important and everything, just too hard to do right now, not on my  watch, you know, the next guy is going to have to do it.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right, right. Well, I know, but I think Sullivan has a lot of good arguments. I think it is very difficult to do. And so…  
- Q2: And, in fact, I think I told you in his most recent meeting with James Blackwell—  I think it’s been like two months ago now—but he laid out in front of Jim his new  slide, I mean, he’s got a set of slides about his vision for the Army.  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q2: And it now has RMA on there, after Force XXI.  
- Marshall: Yes, right.  
- Q2: Force XXI is his thing, modernize the force, etc., etc. But he says now there is an  RMA out there and it’s coming after…  
- Marshall: Right. Well, I’m a patient man…  
- Q2: The Army will be around for a long time. 
- Marshall: Yes. And…  
- Q3: And he… it was on [indistinct] initiative, from what I understand—you know  more about this than I do—that things like the new 525-5 [indistinct].10  
- Q2: Well, it was, and General Freddie Franks [Commander of U.S. Army Training  and Doctrine Command] also was a key player on that. He personally was a big  believer in information warfare. He thought, as did Sullivan, that that was really a  key component of the Army [indistinct], and so they were really trying to get the  525 thing. In the new Field Manual 100-5, as well.  
- Q3: Less than that.  
- Q2: And the new Field Manual 100-6, which deals with information warfare. I think  that’s the only Service that has a manual out on information warfare doctrine. Is it  great? No. But, it’s a first step, and so… There clearly were a whole bunch of other  things that the Army could have done. And it’s not just the Army…  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q2: All the Services could have done a lot more. So it’s nice for Sullivan to say, you  know, “Hey [indistinct]…”  
- Marshall: Well, look, compared to what I thought the problems would be…  
- Q2: That’s right. They were going to firebomb your house, blow up your car, [indistinct]. “You’re threatening our organizational essence and all of our toys.”  
- Marshall: Right, right.  
- Q2: On the other hand, don’t forget what they did on competitive strategies, which  is, in some way, what they’re doing now on RMA. “We are the RMA. We are competitive strategies.”  
- Marshall: Yes, right, right.  
- Q2: F-22—RMA!  
- Marshall: Yes, right.  
- Q2: I really think the more interesting thing is not what’s happening at the top levels, but what’s happening sort of at the mid and younger levels…  
- Marshall: Yes, right.  
- Q2: We really are developing, within the Army, anyway, and, in some ways, even  as much within the Marine Corps, some within the Navy, less so in the Air Force,  these O-4s, -5s, and -6s that are thinking about this, talking about this, and putting, you know, in place things—like Gary Anderson in the Marine Corps, Chuck  Miller in the Air Force—you know, that are putting in place these kinds of things,  where they’re trying to develop these things intellectually, whether with games,  or workshops, or whatever.  
- Marshall: Right. As I say, I’m a patient person. I don’t expect these things to happen  very quickly. I’m pleased with results thus far, on the whole.  
- Q2: Your assessment—you said it went to Paul Wolfowitz and the Service chiefs. Did  it go… 
- Marshall: It went to Cheney. In fact, I had a meeting with Cheney. It was a long time  getting it scheduled, and by the time I met with him—it probably was in August  or September [1992]—it really was too late for him to really do anything. He  listened, found it interesting, but at that point I think he wasn’t going to try to do  anything.  Q2: What about General Colin Powell [Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff]? Did it  go to Powell?  
- Marshall: Yes, it went to Powell.  
- Q2: And what was his reaction?  
- Marshall: I can’t remember exactly, but it was along the lines of, yes, he thought  that was interesting, but… A number of things were sent to Powell. He says some  of the right things, but I don’t think… It was not the kind of thing he was really  interested in.  
- Q2: Did he ever meet with you on it?  
- Marshall: No.  
- Q2: So these were just written responses back to you?  
- Marshall: Yes, or a phone call, I think.  OK. Let me go back and pick up some other things that were going on. One of the  things that we clearly were continuing on was this monitoring of the Soviet Union  as it continued to go down the tubes. Cheney was really very interested in that. For  example, he was very interested in the stuff that Vladimir Shlapentokh was putting out, or other things that we had people put out, people like Vlad Kontorovich  and others. He was also, I thought, very good in the sense that he was not only  interested in the thing, but he had the right instincts, as against the people in the  White House, who had the notion that the Russians had completely changed and  there were never going to be any problems of—  
- Q2: I remember Jonathan Howe [Deputy Assistant to the President for National  Security Affairs, 1991–92] making that argument.  
- Marshall: —“Gorbachev was wonderful” and so on. Cheney was skeptical, in fact,  more skeptical than the people in the Services; for instance, the Joint Staff, who  kind of eliminated all Russian problems—a little premature, from his perspective.  He also was very interested in getting people from the outside in, and not confining himself to, “What does the CIA say?” etc. And so there were these meetings  that used to take place on Saturday mornings, of people from the outside. Initially,  they were really run by, I guess, Scooter Libby [Principal Deputy Under Secretary  of Defense for Strategy and Resources] [indistinct]. But I think before they got  started, I picked the people, based on the guys who’d been right instead of those  who’d been wrong for 20 years. There was some pressure, “Why don’t we have a  more representative sample?” And I said, “The hell with that. Why don’t we pick  the people who have been right and listen to them for a while?” And I used to  attend them, but gradually other people took over the actual arrangements and  so on. One of the flaws in the thing was that after the first one, they invited a couple of  the people from CIA, who then tended to talk too much, take up too much of the  time, rather than listening to these other people. My own view was that it was a  mistake to invite them. I mean they could be there like the other people to listen,  but they tried to play their role as experts.  Another general point I would make, which I’ve already alluded to, is that I  thought that under Wolfowitz the [Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for]  Policy operation in this building ran better than I have ever seen it run before or  since, really. Also, I think the effort that he undertook that was called the “Bridge  Game,” which was the effort in the last year of the Administration to really address  the question of, “How should we change our policy, strategy over the longer  term? Taking a longer-term look, what should our policy, strategy really be?” It  was the best general effort that I’ve seen of that sort. The one major failure area, I  thought, had to do with the nuclear area, where people, I think, continually have  trouble getting beyond the thinking of the 1950s.  Q3: Who were the participants in the “Bridge Game”?  
- Marshall: There were a whole bunch of them. It involved a whole bunch of people,  although it was… The people who came to the meetings depended some on…  Some part of it proceeded on a regional basis, and then the regional people  would come in and so on. But there was, I guess, a core group of people. I forget  who all that was, but there was a group of about maybe eight or ten people.  
- Q3: You were a member?  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q2: Dennis Ross?  
- Q3: Jim Roche?  
- Marshall: No, Jim wasn’t involved. It was people in the government. So it was, like,  Scooter Libby and the heads of all the units and some of the other…  
- Q2: Someone like Harry Rowen [Assistant Secretary of Defense for International  Security Affairs], Steve Hadley [Assistant Secretary of Defense for International  Security Policy]?  
- Marshall: Well, Rowen had gone by that time, I think.  
- Q2: Was Dennis involved? Ross? Bring anybody over from State?  
- Marshall: No, it was entirely a…DoD [group], people from [the Office of the Under  Secretary of Defense for] Policy. Now, it came a cropper when it got leaked to the  newspapers and people backed off…  
- Q8: What was the leak?  
- Q3: This was the DPG leak I assume? Draft?  
- Marshall: No… well, it was a draft… No, it wasn’t a leak of a document… Well, there  was a thing about some of the scenarios, but it was also more this kind of…[gap  for tape change]  
- Marshall: Then I guess we should talk about Desert Storm.
- Q2: I don’t know, we went all the way through the ‘60s and ‘70s and didn’t talk about  Vietnam, so we could…  
- Marshall: Right. We didn’t have very much to do with Vietnam.  
- Q8: A distraction. Some said the Vietnamese War and the contras’ war were distractions from major strategy.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right. Well, I have two or three things, not about Desert Storm in general, but just about the involvement of this office in some respects. One thing, of  course, that was interesting was that we were in the midst of the Summer Study  up at Newport when Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait happened [August 1990].  
- Q2: Did you have a panel on the Middle East and on Iraq going on at the time?  
- Marshall: Well we had a panel on new problems in deterrence and we had a panel  on…  
- Q3: Dealing with regional nuclear actors, and we were planning air strikes against  Iraqi nuclear facilities at the time, as I recall. [Indistinct]  
- Marshall: Yes, right. So two of our panels were very relevant. The reason we’d had  the panel on deterrence was—I don’t think much of deterrence theory, anyway—  first, that we had had the good luck that the deterrees were the Bolsheviks, with  their focus on rationality and so on, so the theory had a little bit more congruence  with reality than it might otherwise have had, and that in the future, however, a  Russian government might well be a far more traditional, normal political elite,  and there’s no reason to believe that they would be especially characterized by  putting a high value on rationality, calculations, and so on.  Secondly, some of the people we would be most interested in deterring were  people from other cultures who had nuclear weapons and so on, and we needed  to think about that and what special problems came with that. And, of course, a  lot of that was focused on particularly the people in the Middle East coming from  Arabic cultures. So there was that aspect.  Then there was the thing that Steve Rosen ran, which was looking at, “What do  you really do when these people are about to use them [nuclear weapons], have  just used them, and so on?”  The other thing that happened fairly shortly after that was that I took a trip to Paris in late September ‘90. I forget whether I told this story earlier, but Henri Conze  [then a former French Ministry of Defense official; the French armaments director  at the time of the talk] invited me out to his apartment in Versailles and had a  number of other people for dinner, men from the French military industry. Of  course, we talked about the situation in the Middle East and Iraq. And, of course,  these people had had a lot to do with the Iraqis. They told me of their appraisal  of the Iraqis, which was that they thought very poorly of the army, the military,  but had great respect for the technical people, the engineers, and the people  that they met in the plants and the laboratories and so on. So their view was, first,  that given this latter characteristic, we shouldn’t underestimate them, and that  they were very capable of doing surprising things, of putting together systems,  technologies, and so on, and so we needed to be wary about that. On the other hand, they thought the army would perform poorly, especially after attack or if  cut off or encircled.  Conze came over to the United States about a couple weeks later, and I had a  chance to talk to him again, and asked for more details about why they had  reached their appraisal about the army. He told me that it had come about, or at  least the reason why the people in industry had this view, was that, of course, the  Iraqis were using a lot of French weaponry in the war with Iran, and the French  industry people had wanted to know a lot more about the performance of  their weaponry. The Iraqis weren’t telling them as much as they wanted, so they  opened up their own effort to find out exactly how their weapons had been used  and how they had performed. It was the by-product of this effort of theirs that  they came to this appraisal of the general competence, performance, morale, and  so on of the Iraqi military establishment.  I passed on both of these things to the people in the Joint Staff J-2, the intelligence  people. I don’t think it had much impact on anybody’s judgment. You see, I had  urged, “Look, the French seem to know a lot. Why don’t you have some people go  talk to them?” I asked later [in France] whether they had—not all of them—but  asked whether there had been any inquiries or any discussion with these people  on the part of Americans, and they said no.  
- Q2: Do you know what the assessments were in the Pentagon of the Iraqi military  capabilities?  
- Marshall: They tended not to rate them as tremendous, but I think they were seen  as comparable.  
- Q2: Just let me rephrase that. Cheney and Powell—Do you know their assessments  of the Iraqi military capabilities?  
- Marshall: I don’t. I don’t know.  
- Q2: I don’t either, but I do know Brent Scowcroft’s [Assistant to the President or  National Security Affairs]—  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q2: —Which was the same as mine, which was that we were going to beat these  guys very quickly—  
- Marshall: Yes, right.  
- Q2: —with very few casualties.  
- Marshall: Yes. Now, I think people must have felt some that, for whatever reason,  whether it was based on a low view of the Iraqis, or whether it was intrinsically  that they weren’t competent, or whether we just had overwhelming capabilities. I  do know in talking with Wolfowitz that he said to me at one point, just a few days  before the thing got started, I mean our attack, that he hoped that things were  going to turn out as well as people were assuring him they thought they would.  And yet, even then, of course, it turned out better.  
- Q2: Yeah, even Scowcroft’s projections were not as good as it really turned out.
- Marshall: Right. Another thing was that early on we undertook [some quick games]  and turned them over to the people on the Joint Staff. We had put in place a  contract with Mark Herman [at Booz Allen Hamilton] for quick-turnaround games.  The guy who was working on the Middle East here, the Army…  
- Q8: Fred Downey?  
- Marshall: No.  
- Q2: The colonel? Ned Cabaniss?  
- Marshall: Cabaniss, yeah. He quickly organized the things and so we had some  games done fairly early. I think their orientation was very much, you know, “What  happens if they (the Iraqis] continue on? How do things go?” And those were  turned over to people.  But the most direct involvement that we really had was that both Rowen and  Wolfowitz were so busy they asked me to run some panels for them, where we  had people from the outside brought in, experts, to discuss various things. One  panel that had several meetings—this would be in probably the October, November, December period—were regional and country experts. And the issue was  how well the U.S. was doing in influencing the views of various publics and elites.  After all, the U.S. was trying to explain why it was there, what the issues were, and  the view of the Iraqis as the bad guys. And at the same time, the Iraqis were trying  to reach the same kind of publics and elites. The issue was, “How was that going?  Is our view doing reasonably well? What are the problems?” and so on. So we had,  I think, probably three meetings of that.  They were kind of interesting, but the main thing I came away with was a sense  that there are experts and then there are experts, and some of them were obviously a lot more interesting, a lot more insightful than others.  
- Q2: Were you actually trying to develop a strategy for shaping perceptions?  
- Marshall: No, it was mainly… Well, other people were…we were just gathering kind  of input and appraisals and so on for them.  We also had some meetings and put together some papers as an input to trying  to look at alternative outcomes of the war, and what the longer-term consequences in the region would be. What would be the distribution of power? What  would the region look like depending on…? And three potential outcomes were  posited.  
- Q2: Were any of them the actual outcome?  
- Marshall: No.  
- Q2: You needed more—four possible outcomes.  
- Marshall: Right. Tried to supply that.  The last thing, which maybe would have been potentially the most useful, was  once the ground war began, and it looked very quickly as though we were obviously going to win, Fred Iklé suggested that we ought to really think about the  war termination process. So we had two meetings in which Iklé was one of the participants, but there were some other people. And one aspect of it was, looking  at the whole literature that exists on war termination and the problems you can  get into or the things to be avoided, we wanted to try to put together some tailored set of suggestions that came from the literature on things that ought to be  avoided and so on in whatever termination process we got into.  Then there was also some set of suggestions about things that might be part of an attractive termination strategy for us. And those were sent up to Rowen and Wolfowitz. I  don’t know, in all of the scramble at the time, and it all happened so fast, but my guess  is it didn’t have much effect. But it was kind of interesting. It was a useful thing to do.  
- Q2: Did in any of your possible outcomes or your war termination strategies did you  call for the destruction of the Republican Guard as a condition for war termination?  
- Marshall: We assumed that that was more or less going to happen, then it was one  of the things that didn’t happen.  Another aspect of it was that I remember people were proposing that we remain  and occupy the southern part of Iraq, because you would have a hold over a  major part of the oil fields, and that you would keep this as leverage for the future.  Now, in some sense, as things have worked out, that may be not too important,  because we have been able to maintain the embargo on shipping.  
- Q2: What about weapons of mass destruction? Does your war termination strategy  call for destroying all their capabilities?  
- Marshall: No, because we’d sort of assumed that it was already destroyed. We didn’t  know that there were the undiscovered parts of the thing. No, you see, most of it  was procedural and dealt with what not to get sucked into, and things of that sort.  
- Q3: No talks while fighting, that kind of stuff.  
- Marshall: Right. Now this talk has addressed mainly activities during the Bush Administration. I don’t really have a lot to say about the Clinton period.  
- Q2: Before you leave the Bush thing… Are you done on Bush?  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q2: One of the things at the start of the Bush Administration that you were involved  with, of course, was the NSR-12 [National Security Review 12] process.  
- Marshall: Oh yes, that’s true.11  
- Q2: That’s not to say that the results of the NSR-12 process were anything we really  want to highlight as being great thinking on the future of the world or anything.  
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q2: Nonetheless, it was interesting that you were invited over to participate in that  as a member—  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q2: —of the assistant secretary-level group that Paul Wolfowitz chaired while he  was bouncing back and forth between Indonesia and Washington waiting for  confirmation as the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy— 
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q2: —that you participated in that effort. And I was going to ask you, were there other,  setting aside the Kissinger era, were there other NSC-level efforts comparable that  you directly participated in in terms of attempts to do strategy formulation at the  NSC level?  
- Marshall: I would say in the Carter period. I mean the thing [Presidential Review  Memorandum 10, “Comprehensive Net Assessment”] that Sam Huntington ran  and so on, which we were very much involved in.12 But I guess those are the  [indistinct].  
- Q2: Nothing under Reagan?  
- Marshall: No. Nothing under Reagan.  
- Q2: And nothing under Clinton.  
- Marshall: And this time I don’t think there was anything. In fact, one comment I  would make about the Clinton period is my sense that it’s probably the only administration that I know of that came in that didn’t somehow address these issues  in some systematic way, whatever you thought about how well or poorly they  [the other administrations] did it. I think this is the only one that I know of that  didn’t really seem to address these issues. Now, maybe this was done, say, as far as  this building was concerned, and in much more informal ways through Secretary  of Defense Les Aspin, but…  Q2: Or maybe it wasn’t done.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q3: In DoD it wasn’t done.  
- Marshall: One other thing to say about the Bush thing is that it was in that administration that because of what was happening with respect to the Soviet Union,  the whole focus of attention of this office really changed. It started out where we  were still looking at some aspects of the situation relative to the Russians, and  then fairly quickly moved on to a very different focus on this power projection  problem, on Asia, and on the MTR and RMA effort.  Q3: I just have one small question about your effort to study the Soviet Union in  Chapter 11. Did you sponsor John Hines’s work with the Soviet general officers?  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q3: And it was as part of that effort that he got some insights into the Soviet nuclear  command procedures.  
- Marshall: Yeah. In fact, we finally have the draft…  
- Q2: 160 pages.  
- Marshall: Yeah, it needs a little editing, but I read the thing and it’s really pretty good.  
- Q3: Yeah, you just mentioned a couple of things out of it. It seems to be really  interesting.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right. Of course, it’s gone on for quite a long time. It looked to me like there was this period where there would be an opportunity to go and talk  with these people, and it wouldn’t last forever. So I started John Hines on that as  a way of trying to understand, “What did they really do? What were their assessments? What can we find about the actual methods, techniques that they really  used in the General Staff for making assessments?”  
- Q2: Focused on the nuclear issue.  
- Marshall: Well, this is on the nuclear issue. But there were earlier things that were  broader: How did they look at the correlation of forces and so on.  
- Q2: And have you got stuff on that? I mean, did you get stuff—  
- Marshall: Yeah, got some of that.  
- Q2: —that confirmed that we were on the right track, or we weren’t on the right  track, or…?  
- Marshall: We were sort of, I think, on the right track. Although, again, it’s like one  of these things when you start looking into it you say, “Ah yes, right. It’s a big  government with people with different views” and so on. But it turned out to be  an interesting effort. I can’t quite remember when, in fact, we started that, but it  was certainly four or five years ago.  We also had John Hines speculating based on whether we really get on the next…  Well, that same summer, he was running that other group. That was the summer  of ‘90, when we had five groups for the Summer Study at Newport, and John was  doing this 20-year look-ahead on Russia: After it [the Soviet Union] went down,  when did it recover? What kind of a state would it be? And he then continued to  do some things in that area.  That’s pretty much all I have. Are there other things that ought to be talked about?  
- Q2: Did you want to talk about the RMA stuff you’ve done so far in the Clinton  Administration?  
- Marshall: The thing to say about that is that following the MTR assessment in ‘92,  there wasn’t time for anything to happen. When the new group came in, fairly early  Graham Allison [Assistant Secretary of Defense for Policy and Plans] was interested  in having Aspin become aware of this and use and support it. Clark Murdock [deputy to the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy—Planning] saw that as, I guess, a  thing that Aspin ought to grab ahold of, and was important in trying to formulate  actions he could take to institutionalize some effort: And it’s really through that that  this RMA Senior Steering Group that John Deutch [Deputy Secretary of Defense at  the time of the talk] heads came about. I think a memorandum setting that all up  was signed by Aspin in September or October of ‘93.  
- Q2: Any sense for how Powell reacted to that? Or Allison or Murdock or Aspin or  William Perry [Deputy Secretary, then Secretary of Defense] talking to Powell or  his people about it?  
- Marshall: No. Now, Admiral David Jeremiah, who was the Vice [Chairman of the  Joint Chiefs of Staff], was very interested and we talked some with him. Of course,  he felt, I think, he was kind of a “lone warrior” looking ahead and looking more imaginatively at things and the changes that could be made. So he was always  very supportive, but he had his own narrow, little effort going, the “2025” study.13  Q2: Well, and then, of course, Deutch has been a big supporter of this from the beginning.  
- Marshall: Yes, right. And early on, when Perry was the Deputy Secretary, I went to  see him just to tell him what I was doing. I told him about the RMA, the Asia stuff,  the power projection stuff. And he was very satisfied. Those were all the right  questions, he thought, to really look at. Of course, he had known about the whole  thing, because in probably November or October [Aug 1992]—I don’t know  whether it was before or after the election—I had held a meeting of all of the  then-living DDR&Es [Directors of Defense Research and Engineering], and they all  came.14 The thing I wanted to talk with them about was [that] in the assessment  that we put out in July of that year, one of the four issues had to do with fixing  the acquisition process, not in general, but in a particular phase to support the  experimentation and so on. At that meeting, it was a one-day meeting.  Prior to the meeting, we sent the DDR&Es materials about what our views were. I  started off the meeting with a general presentation on what we were about and  the four issues. Then the two things I really wanted to talk with them about and  get their reaction to was, one, did they also believe we were in a period where  big changes would take place, and then, secondly, this matter of the acquisition  system and what ideas did they have, what might you do. And Perry was at that  and spoke about several things that interested him.  
- Q3: It was around that time that he published that Brookings Institution study [A  New Concept of Cooperative Security] 15 along with Ash Carter and…  
- Marshall: Yes, right.  
- Q3: Who else?  
- Marshall: John Steinbruner.  
- Q3: They got some of the elements of the RMA.  
- Marshall: Yeah. Of course, he [Perry] has tended to be a bit of the view that the  revolution has largely happened, in a way.  
- Q2: Is that Deutch’s view? I don’t think that’s Deutch’s view.  
- Marshall: No.  
- Q3: One other small thing. It was in the Clinton Administration that this business on  innovation…  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q3: And I gather [that’s] still in progress.  
- Marshall: Yes, right. They’re all connected with the same thing.  
- Q2: Two bureaucratic notes. 
- Marshall: Yes?  
- Q2: Since you’re non-career SES [Senior Executive Service]…
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q2: …and every change of political administration you tender your resignation?  
- Marshall: No, I’ve never…well, I forget… I may have actually only once been  actually asked to tender…  
- Q2: When was that?  
- Marshall: I think under Bush.  
- Q2: That Cheney asked for it?  
- Marshall: I think the White House [asked for it] or something.  
- Q2: I thought at the start of this administration all non-career SESs and Schedule Cs  were asked to tender their resignations.  
- Marshall: I can’t remember.  
- Q2: Well, I do remember that at the start of this administration, there was a movement within the DoD Transition Team to replace you.  
- Marshall: Yes, right.  
- Q2: And that’s the only time I know of that there really was an active effort—  
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q2: —to replace you by an incoming administration. And I don’t think this thing,  when Bush came in, that that was an active effort to replace you.  
- Marshall: No.  
- Q3: They asked everybody.  
- Marshall: That’s right.  
- Q2: But this [under Clinton] was an active effort to replace you.  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q2: And they had to go to Larry Smith [Counselor to the Secretary of Defense and  the Deputy Secretary of Defense] and he went to Aspin to bring it to his attention—  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q2: —and Aspin said that he was not going to be the only Secretary of Defense to  have fired Andy Marshall, or he was not going to be known as the Secretary of  Defense that fired Andy Marshall.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q2: And so he wanted the word passed to you that you were not to leave and wanted very much for you to stay.  
- Marshall: Yes, right.  
- Q2: The other bureaucratic note is that they subordinated this office to an Assistant  Secretary of Defense [the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Policy and Plans].  
- Marshall: Yes. 
- Q2: The only time in the history of the office, since it was created in 1973, that it  had been subordinated to an Assistant Secretary of Defense. Now, we know that  you have been all over the place, sometimes reporting directly to the Secretary,16  sometimes reporting to the Under Secretary,17 but never before to an assistant  secretary, Graham Allison—  
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q2: —which Allison, of course, wanted—  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q2: —which, if I were him, I would want it, too. But, it says something in some ways  about how this OSD [Office of the Secretary of Defense] has viewed this office. As  I say, those are bureaucratic notes, because, as usual, you’ve outmaneuvered all  those guys. Allison’s gone, you’re working for Deutch, God’s in his heaven and all’s  right with the world, you know.  
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q2: But, the bureaucratic tendencies initially were not going the right way on this one.  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q2: They probably were the most negative, I would say, of your entire experience  here.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q2: Although, now I think it’s a fairly good working situation.  
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q3: I seem to recall you mentioning that there was some initial skepticism or questions at the beginning of Harold Brown’s tenure as Secretary of Defense and then  very quickly it’s the stuff that you were doing for him…  
- Marshall: No, I don’t think so. Early, I was told I should stay, and never… No. Well,  what did happen was, as we talked about earlier, Brown did have Eugene Fubini  do this effort looking at how OSD ought to be organized. Brown also didn’t want  so many people reporting to himself. And they also created this Under Secretary  for Policy and stuck Net Assessment over there?18  Right. Well, maybe we should adjourn.  Q2: One of the key questions people have always and always will ask is, what influence has this office had? I mean, how can you tell that’s ever made a difference?  
- Marshall: Yes, right.  
- Q2: And since you work in such strange and indirect ways, that’s difficult to do.  
- Marshall: Hard, hard, hard to say.  
- Q3: But there are people around now. You could go and interview them.  
- Q2: Well, that’s what I’m suggesting, is that there are people, like maybe RisCassi,  that we could go and just ask them, what influence did net assessment have on the kinds of things you did and how did it happen? Now, maybe he doesn’t recollect, but, we should at least go ask or somebody should go ask those people to see  what they say. Because it’s one thing for us to say, “Well, this happened and that  happened, so there might have been some linkage.” It’s another thing for the guy  that actually did the changes to say, you know, “Yeah, by God, that was really a  great thing.” And you’ve still got…you know, you’ve got all these guys still around.  
- Q3: That’s right.  
- Q2: One of the things that you always made me do in the NATO [Warsaw] Pact  Balance was to project into the future.  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q2: Have you tried to do any of that?  
- Marshall: About the office? About the future?  
- Q2: Or, maybe, the strategic environment?  
- Marshall: Oh, yes. Yes, right.  
- Q2: I mean, I think the projection about the office is fairly straightforward: when you  leave, it dies.  
- Marshall: You generally know what I think about the future, but we could do something on that.  
- Q8: I agree on the issue of the influence of the office and the need to have outsiders  make observations.  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q8: And I’m not sure the tape is still rolling, but just from today there are several  things you haven’t said that I know about or heard about.  
- Marshall: Yes, right.  
- Q8: You know, in Korea, the South Koreans buying submarines. That became a big  issue in direct talks with the South Koreans, and they had to give explanations,  and then we made them stop doing it. But it became… It was put on the agenda,  “Why aren’t you improving your forces where you should be, according to the  Gaskin suggestions?”  Also, this is such a small list of things. Maybe you’re not… your self-effacing modesty is giving [indistinct].  
- Marshall: well, I don’t really gather those things…  
- Q2: A lot of times you don’t get…  
- Marshall: I don’t care a lot. I don’t get very much feedback. My view has tended to  be, you put things out and people make whatever use they do of them. Often you  don’t know, and it doesn’t make much difference.  
- Q8: Cheney announced that he would freeze the cuts in South Korea. And there was  an internal deliberation. And the Gaskin piece was… I mean, I saw this kind of  thing happening, I was part of that. And ISA [International Security Affairs office in  OSD] had actually written out the units to be pulled out of South Korea. Larry Smith told me that your RMA stuff had been used by Aspin in a meeting  with Clinton, and how happy they were with… Remember I told you I complained, “‘Why hasn’t Secretary Aspin had a long meeting with Mr. Marshall yet?”  And Larry Smith told me, “What do you mean? We’ve used his stuff. Aspin took it  over to tell Clinton about it in some big kind of NSC-type meeting.” So I said, “Well,  Mr. Marshall hasn’t been told that.” Smith says, “Oh, you know [indistinct]” and  walked on down the corridor.  
- Q2: That’s an interesting point, though, because there are almost, maybe two levels,  or two categories that… Because if you went and asked Harold Brown, or former  Secretary of Defense James Schlesinger, “What impact did Marshall have?” They  wouldn’t have those kinds of anecdotes. They would be at a much more macro,  strategic level, although they might have one or two things, like this ASW thing  or something like that. But then it might be interesting, also, to get to that kind of  stuff, where you can say, look it’s not just that, but even in day-to-day policy deliberations—we ought to hammer the South Koreans about submarines. Because  I think for those that have always doubted the utility of the office, “What the hell  does that office do, anyway?” it would be useful to have some of those old, “And  we hammered the South Koreans on submarines.” But also these larger things.  Harold Brown says, “Well, we shaped the entire U.S.-Soviet competition, and by  going after the {…}” etc.  
- Q8: The discovery that the Russians were writing these bizarre things in ‘82 and so  forth about the revolution in military affairs; that didn’t have to happen. I mean, if  you hadn’t had Notra Trulock and whoever else was on this in the mid-80s…19  
- Q2: John Hines.
- Q8: …Hines… That’s not considered to be a CIA Soviet military matter, to say, “Oh,  by the way, look at this.” And yet we don’t even know what the consequences  are yet of that having been discovered, Andy Krepinevich, MTR, RMA. You would  probably say it’s early, only ten years since Marshal Nikolai Ogarkov’s first books.  So just in terms of the process, of how strategic planning takes place or doesn’t  take place [indistinct].  
- Marshall: But in things of this sort, it’s all so complex, and there are so many causes  that it’s hard to trace.  
- Q2: Well, wait a second. One thing that we do know is that neither the CIA, nor the  DIA, nor any of the Service intelligence agencies, even to this date, have been  jumping up and down about Soviet and Russian military writings about the MTR,  RMA, and how this is really going to shape the future of warfare and we’d better  get serious about it. None of those intelligence agencies for the last 13—first  book was in ‘82, Ogarkov—none of them for the last 13 years have seized on this  thing to say, “By God, we ought to get off…” And what’s the purpose of an intelligence agency to begin with?  So this thing about your being kind of this window on the policy world, and  between the policy and the intel worlds, where you try to grab stuff out of intel  that you think is really important for policymakers, I mean, that’s where this kind  of stuff comes in. So you can say, “Well, jeez, we don’t really know cause and effect.” We do know  that there hasn’t been a single intelligence agency out there that’s been jumping  up and down about this. Been a couple people like Lieutenant General Bill Odom  [Retired],21 you know, when he was over at Army intel [Assistant Chief of Staff for  Intelligence] and then Director of NSA, or something like that, but not institutions,  not organizations, [indistinct]. So I think you can claim credit for some things, not  everything.  
- Marshall: Right. OK.  
- Q3: Well, let me say one thing I mentioned to Kurt. I feel that we now have a first cut  at an oral history.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q3: And it took a while, but it’s now all down on paper. So we can develop it more  and so forth, but now whatever happens, we’ve got some legacy. So I’m…  
- Marshall: You’re happy.  Q3: I’m pleased. And there’s more to be done certainly. Well, look, I mean [indistinct].  
- Q8: It’s a start. Where are your remarks on China and Asia, though, and the future  security environment stuff you began in ‘87?  
- Marshall: Well, a couple of years before that, when we really started working on  that.  
- Q8: A big theme is missing here.  
- Marshall: Yes, I agree. Right. That’s presumably an issue of the future.  
- Q8: It’s also an area where Wolfowitz really took off. You finally got an Under Secretary for Policy who had some personal background in Asia. From Robert Komer  [Under Secretary of Defense for Policy in the Carter Administration] on, you have  these NATO guys.  
- Marshall: Yes, right.  
- Q8: That’s another reason to have Wolfowitz interviewed. There’s a big process story  here. For the “organizational process” man himself to not be interested in organizational processes is quite an irony.  
- Marshall: No, I am, I am. But I see myself in the business of trying to understand  things, and have not been tracing every little thing that happens as…  
- Q8: It’s not little. War termination meetings and the memos—who knows what  happened? All we know, it was a very different approach than…  
- Marshall: Again, you’d have to talk with Paul Wolfowitz and to Harry Rowen to know  whether anything came of that. But there was such a rush and the whole thing came  to such a quick conclusion that there wasn’t time, I think, to really absorb that stuff.  Q8: On the Iraqi estimates, there’s a book that has a whole bunch of quotes in it  about people who thought we’d probably lose against Iraq, or take at least 20,000  American casualties before we eventually won. It’s Jeffrey Record. And his book,  for various reasons, has a whole chapter…He assembles all these quotations… 22 
- Q2: Used to be at the Washington Times. Used to have this “Wall of Shame” or “Hall of  Shame” thing, that would have one featured, one a week, or something like that,  you know, Ed Luttwak, [(Steven) Canby?]. One of the few outsiders that I know  of that got it right was John Mearsheimer. In fact, I think he’s the only outsider, I mean outside government. Most people inside the government… I remember  Luttwak coming over and going, “Oh God! Don’t go to war! They’re 40,000 American lives! It’ll be terrible! They’ll just kill us!”  
- Q8: Mr. Marshall’s understating, in other words. On the French estimates of the Iraqis  being weak, that’s quite important as it turns out. On the—What’s the other one  that you mentioned? It was something about this meeting taking place and—  You’re very much understating these things. In fact, the conventional wisdom  at the time was the other way. So I’m struck by the difficulties Kurt faces, given a  presenter who is almost trying to deceive you by understating the influence of  his office and this kind of, “Oh, gee” quality, “It didn’t really matter.” I made about  seven or eight notes here, so I’ll just type them up and give them to you. But if you  could look at the conventional wisdom at the time, in newspapers and so forth,  you’ll see it’s quite the opposite from what he is sending forward. 

* * *

### Endnotes

1 Eds: This chapter is based on an interview conducted 25 January 1995.  
2 Eds: Anthony Lake, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, “From Containment to Enlargement,” (prepared remarks, Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced  International Studies, Washington, D.C., Sept. 21, 1993); William J. Clinton, “Remarks to the  48th Session of the United Nations General Assembly in New York City,” Sept. 27, 1993, Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, vol. 29, iss. 39 (Oct. 4, 1993), 1903. William J. Clinton,  A National Security Strategy of Engagement and Enlargement (The White House, February  1996).  
3 The Future Security Environment, Report of the Future Security Environment Working Group,  submitted to the Commission on Integrated Long-Term Strategy (Washington: Department  of Defense, Oct 1988).  
4 National Security Strategy of the United States (Washington: GPO, Mar 1990), 24.  
5 Department of Defense, A Strategic Framework for the Asian Pacific Rim: Looking Toward the  21st Century (Washington: Department of Defense, 1990), reprinted in Senate Armed Services  Committee, The President’s Report on the U.S. Military Presence in East Asia, 101st Cong., 2nd  sess. (Washington: GPO, 1990), 28–55.  
6 On the tree-cutting incident and the U.S. response, see Richard G. Head, Frisco W. Short, and  Robert C. McFarlane, Crisis Resolution: Presidential Decision Making in the Mayaguez and Korean Confrontations (Boulder: Westview Press, 1978), 149–215.  
7 In early 1994, an article in the Korean press reported that the extant operation plan for the defense of South Korea called for allied forces to remove the regime in Pyongyang if it attacked  the South. South Korean Defense Minister Yi Pyong-tae was quoted as telling a parliamentary  defense committee that, “We have a strategic concept that in case [the] North Koreans launch  a preemptive attack we will use our retaliatory operations [to create] an opportunity [for] national reunification.” Korea Herald, 25 Mar 1994, 3, in Foreign Broadcast Information Service,  Daily Report: East Asia, FBIS-EAS-94-058, 25 Mar 1994, 20–21.  
8 Michael R. Gordon, “Pentagon Studies Plans to Bolster U.S.-Korea Forces,” New York Times, 2  Dec 1993, A1, A11; Barton Gellman, “Trepidation at Root Of U.S. Korea Policy,” Washington  Post, 12 Dec 1993, A1, A49.  
9 Patrick E. Tyler, “7 Hypothetical Conflicts Foreseen by Pentagon” New York Times, 17 Feb  1992, A8; Barton Gellman, “Pentagon War Scenario Spotlights Russia,” Washington Post, 20  Feb 1992, Al, A21.  
10 Force XXI Operations: A Concept for the Evolution of Full-Dimensional Operations for the Strategic Army of the Early Twenty-First Century, TRADOC Pamphlet 525-5 (Fort Monroe, VA:  U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command, 1994) outlined the Army’s vision of military  operations in the early 21st Century and provided the conceptual basis for the Army’s future  evolution.  
11 See Richard Halloran, “Calling for a Redesign Of National Security,” New York Times, 2 Apr  1989, E4; David Ignatius, “Life After ‘Containment’—Muddling Through,” Washington Post,  9 Apr 1989, B2; and George C. Wilson, “Military Budget to Precede Strategic Review,” Washington Post, 10 Apr 1989, A17.  
12 Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC-10, Jimmy Carter to Vice President; Secretary of  State; Secretary of Defense; Director, Office of Management and Budget; Director, Arms  Control and Disarmament Agency; Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; Director of Central Intelligence; U.S. Representative to the United Nations, subj: Comprehensive Net Assessment  and Military Force Posture Review, 18 Feb 1977 (SECRET; Declassified 6 Jan 1992) [PRM/  NSC-10, Presidential Review1 Memorandum (PRM), Box 1, Records of the National Security  Council, Record Group 273, National Archives]. The NSC study for PRM-10, “Comprehensive Net Assessment,” Jul 1977 has not been declassified (telecon with James Yancey, Jimmy  Carter Library). Unclassified discussions of the study can be found in Memo, Zbigniew Brzezinski to Secretary of State; Secretary of Defense; Director, Office of Management and Budget; Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency; Director of Central Intelligence, subj:  SCC Meeting on PRM-10, July 7, 1977, 25 Jul 1977 (SECRET; Declassified 29 Apr 1994)  [Declassified Documents Collection, 1995/0598]; Zbigniew Brzezinski, Power and Principle:  Memoirs of the National Security Adviser, 1977-1981 (New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux,  1983), 177; Samuel P. Huntington, American Military Strategy, Policy Paper in International  Affairs No. 28 (Berkeley: Institute of International Studies, University of California, Berkeley,  1986), 28–29; Hedrick Smith, “Carter Study Takes More Hopeful View of Strategy of U.S.,”  New York Times, 8 Jul 1977, A.1. A sanitized version of the DoD study for PRM-10 has been  released. See PRM/NSC-10 Military Strategy and Force Posture Review Final Report, Jun 1977  (TOP SECRET; Sanitized 13 Aug 1993) Jimmy Carter Library.  
13 See Institute for National Strategic Studies, National Defense University, Project 2025 (Washington: INSS, 6 Nov 1991).  
14 Meeting of Former DDR&Es on Competition in the Military-Technical Revolution, SAIC,  Tysons Corner, VA, 31 Aug 1992.  
15 Ashton B. Carter, William J. Perry, and John D. Steinbruner, A New Concept of Cooperative  Security (Washington: Brookings Institution, 1992).  
16 Department of Defense Directive 5105.39, Director of Net Assessment, 6 Dec 1971.  
17 Department of Defense Directive 5105.39, Director of Net Assessment, 27 Sep 1985.  
18 Alice C. Cole, Alfred Goldberg, Samuel A. Tucker, and Rudolph A. Winnacker, eds., The  Department of Defense: Documents on Establishment and Organization, 1944-1978 (Washington:  GPO, 1978), 259–261;  
19 Notra Trulock, III, “Emerging Technologies and Future War: A Soviet View,” Appendix B  in The Future Security Environment, 97–163; Notra Trulock, III, Kerry L. Hines, and Anne D.  Herr, Soviet Military Thought in Transition: Implications for the Long-Term Competition, PSR  Report No. 1831 (Arlington: Pacific-Sierra Research Corp., May 1988).  
20 John C. Hines, Phillip A. Petersen, and Notra Trulock, Ill, “Soviet Military Theory from 1945–  2000: Implications for NATO,” The Washington Quarterly, 9, no. 4 (Fall 1986): 117–137.  
21 William E. Odom, “Soviet Force Posture: Dilemmas and Directions,” Problems of Communism,  34, no. 4 (Jul-Aug 1985): 1–14.  
22 Jeffrey Record, Hollow Victory: A Contrary View of the Gulf War (Washington: Brassey’s (US),