This book is based on the transcriptions of a series of 12 interviews with Andrew W.  Marshall conducted by Kurt Guthe between September 1993 and July 1999. Guthe  prepared the transcriptions and edited them to improve their accuracy and  readability, not their literary quality. Where comments could not be heard clearly  on the recording, Guthe inserted the notation “[indistinct].” Where the need to  change the tape caused a portion of the conversation to go unrecorded, Guthe  inserted a notation indicating a gap in time. Guthe also used brackets to insert  comments or indicate edits to the interview content; the editors have left those  unchanged, and have done the same using the notation [Eds:].  The editors of this collection of interviews have lightly edited the transcripts for  readability and relevance. In addition to Guthe and Marshall, a number of former  staff members in the Office of Net Assessment participated in the interviews. The  words of all participants other than Marshall, including Guthe, are prefaced by  Q:, followed by a number to differentiate the participants. The editors have also  arranged the transcripts as a chronological account of Marshall’s professional  career up to 1993, divided largely by presidential administration. In some cases,  more than one interview is relevant to a particular period or one interview will  cover several periods; in those cases, the editors have included the relevant  portions of each interview in the chapter focused on the appropriate historical  period. The editors have also written an introduction to each chapter to contextualize the discussion that follows.  Guthe created the outlines beginning some interview excerpts from the handwritten outlines Marshall prepared for some talks. The endnotes for the interviews  were prepared by Guthe based on sources and information he uncovered in his  research. The endnotes for the chapter introductions were prepared by the editors, and are prefaced with Eds:.  The views expressed in this publication are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of the Department of Defense or the  U.S. government. 