## Introduction ##  
At the beginning of the interview process in September 1993, Andrew Marshall  met with Kurt Guthe to discuss the book project and the themes Marshall intended  would guide the subsequent interviews. Marshall and Guthe met again in October  1995 when the interviews were complete to discuss and refine the themes they  had intended to explore.  The editors chose to include both of these sessions as their own chapter: while  the topics in these thematic interviews necessarily duplicate some of the ones  discussed in the chronological chapters, often Marshall describes them in different terms or he adds different nuances to the discussion. Consequently, the  editors concluded that these sessions further illuminate Marshall’s thinking on  a wide variety of issues. Any attempt to incorporate the two sessions into the  book’s chronological chapters ran the risk of having to eliminate portions of  the interviews to improve “readability” and continuity. Such an elimination, the  editors felt, would do violence to the overriding principle to record and report  Marshall’s words as delivered during the book project and to provide a complete  primary source document for future generations. 

## Outline for 24 September 1993 Talk  
[Note: Italicized items were not discussed during the interview.]  
### Themes 1  
1. Importance of resource constraints/macroeconomic perspective  
    — Criteria problem (early ‘50s)—dollars reflect resources/engineers’ mistakes  
    — Use in forecasting Soviet programs  
    — Military burden—importance of for long-term competition  
        • Leads to interest in Soviet underinvestment in health care and pollution—>  future claims on resources, permanent handicap because of deep human  problems, e.g., birth defects/life expectancy, etc.  
2. Opponents not fixed—can’t proceed by making forecast and planning against.  Even using several alternatives not full satisfactory. But cannot assume worst  (minimax/failure of game theory—hope of early RAND days)  
    — Must try to understand character of others  
        • Social-cultural  
        • History—>organizations, bureaucratic organizational behavior  
    — His/their weaknesses and your strengths—special competences; future of  investment or social-cultural (Crozier) very important. Ignored in standard  analysis (military) which focuses on his strengths (especially new ones), our  weaknesses  
        • All of these hard to change, which means can exploit his weaknesses. First  net assessment story—why Soviet problems not worth reporting; reaction  to weaknesses. Also means that suggestions for our improvement must  take account of implementation problem (again most analysis does not—  puts forward abstractly best solutions—weakness of most systems analysis)  
3. Best to think of situations as involving:  
    — Actors, each with strengths, weaknesses, resources, patterns of behavior,  traits, etc., some of which may have trends of change over time, e.g., differential rates of GNP growth, etc.  
        • Each has goals, strategies (often have to be constructed), memberships in  coalitions, etc.  
        • Context within which actors seek goals, compete  
            −Important factors not under their control, or largely so, e.g., technology,  demographics, climate (including Fletcher’s 140-year cycles), new  plagues, etc.  
4. Importance in many cases of the long-term competition framework of analysis  
    — Change of perspective, focuses attention on strategy for competing, forces  attention to complex set of goals (often ignored in standard analysis). Focuses  on specific decisions as moves in a long-term competition  
    — Highlights issues of the complex consequences of specific choices and decisions (Watts, Roche)  
5. Importance of nonrational aspects of man  
    — Organizational behavior (limited rationality)  
    — Ethology—new model of man—hardwired responses (e.g., eye vs. reason;  Kahneman, Tversky, McGuire)  
    — Analysis of perceptions, political use/importance of military power, display,  etc. What do Russians focus on, give us good marks in, impresses them  
    — Schlesinger/Ardrey—late ‘60s/RAND early ‘70s effort  
    — Critique of standard deterrence theory  
        • Rational actor  
        • Organizational level of analysis—what assessments/advice from military staffs (assessments). Soviet assessments of balance—role in net assessment—practices, character of analysis—their scenarios, assumptions, differences in calculations—cratering, human vulnerability, for example (Hines’s finding, their inferences  from Minuteman silo spacing and their tests (vulnerability assumptions))  
        • Individual behavioral/gut responses (ethology). Small group behavior  
    — Herb Goldhamer—change of values—early heroic warfare/glory vs. later  
    — Unusual performance  
        • Herb Goldhamer—ramming/criteria aspects of analysis  
        • Early carrier battles vs. 5% rule (source of D-Day planning)  
6. How to look at the future  
    — Can’t predict/false elimination of uncertainty—uncertainty has to be faced,  managed not eliminated (can’t be—much analysis assumes can be)  
    — Some aspects of future surer than others—especially long-term economic  trends (macro) (e.g., differential rates of GNP growth—but need right experts  —Wolf/Bruce Scott), demography, maybe some aspects of technology  
    — Value of scenarios—not as predictions but as way of enhancing our imagining of alternative futures (must be tailored to purpose of analysis). Peter  Schwartz, Clem Sunter, Bruce Scott, Pierre Wack  
    — Also use model above, e.g., actors (goals, strategies) interaction with context—path gaming (invention of)  
7. Value of gaming  
    — Early RAND impetus—use of human skills at game playing to discover strategies (good ones) for games resisting mathematical/closed solutions  
    — Herb Goldhamer’s political/crisis gaming (mid/late ‘50s)—> Helmer/Dalkey  games—> SAFE (planning of forces game)  
    — NSDG games/SDI—>change in way wars fought. Problem of standard  analysis, usual criteria/Nitze  
8. War, conflict normal  
    — Robin Fox article (get). Profound belief in future of war, AWM  
9. Only so much stupidity one man can prevent—AWM  
    — Reason  
    — Lots of stupidity  
10.  Strategy for influence  
    — Don’t take credit  
    — Work on long-term problems, try for persuasion, change minds—shape way  to look at problem (lots of competition on immediate issues—nature of U.S.  government leads to waste of effort, decisions undone later)  
    — Nature of U.S. government—no one can decide (Schlesinger/Somalia airfield  case)—nature of process—extended social-political process/influence by inputs  
    — Delusions of intelligence people  
11. Addenda  
    — Deterrence is an empirical problem  
    — Centrality of the political/psychological role of military power  
        • Herb Goldhamer  
        • Schlesinger  
        • Tiger/new model of man  
        • Display, how to  
    — Good questions, importance of (aphorism)  
        • Enders Wimbush case/get right answer—DIA response/CIA indifference 

### Themes 1
- Marshall: I think that of the next couple of times that we meet, probably one session ought to be devoted to getting ready for the meeting that’s at the end of  October [29 Oct 1993], and the other one could be almost an interview—I could  make some notes, you could create some questions on my early background  or antecedents, and then maybe you could undertake to take whatever is said  there and suggest how a chapter might be organized and then you could try to  put something together. But for today, we can just talk about these intellectual  themes. So maybe I should just start.  OK. I just have numbered them, and the first one—they occurred somewhat  chronologically—is this importance of resource constraints and the macroeconomic perspective on many of these national security issues. It seemed to me to  be a central theme of things I’ve been involved in. Very early on at RAND—once  I’d gotten out to Santa Monica—I was involved in this so-called “criteria problem.”2  One of the things that economists were put to work on and one of the reasons  that economists were brought to RAND was because it was thought that the  RAND Corporation ought to have some economists to address this so-called “criteria,” “military worth” issue. Clearly, resources were part of that. And one of the  things that came up very early was that the engineers, who until that time had  dominated all the studies, often made kind of intellectual mistakes in organizing  or specifying the criteria. They also had some odd beliefs that the budgets or the  dollars were just some arbitrary, bureaucratically imposed obstacle that they [the  budgets] didn’t have anything intrinsic to do with the problem. So one of the  things early on was to try to persuade the engineers that budgets and dollars  reflected resources, and they reflected choices that they were making, and that  the costs in the macroeconomic sense were real.  Another way that this resource constraint issue matters or got involved was in  the thinking about the ways to improve our forecasting of Soviet programs.3  One of the problems had been that people made forecasts of how many missiles  they could build, how many bombers, how many this or whatever it was, and  there was no sense that if you added all the programs together maybe they [Eds:  program costs] just outran all resources that they [Eds: Soviets] could possibly  put into things. So one of the proposals that we made—and something I think  some other people at the Agency were interested in toward the late ‘50s—was to  begin costing out programs as best you could and then looking at what everything added up to.4 That was, in some sense, the initial motive of the development of the costing of the military program that was undertaken by the Central  Intelligence Agency. But anyway, that notion that overall resources are limited  and need to be thought about arose in this context of trying to do a better job of  forecasting and looking at the trade-offs the Soviets themselves would face.  Related to that is this whole notion of the military burden, and especially the  importance of looking at that not only for our own side—which we didn’t pay a  lot of attention to, that is, people like Joseph Loftus and I—but from the Soviet  side, because they were so obviously outspending us as a percentage of gross national product, and this meant in the long term that this would cause problems,  difficulties for them, that they could do so only with penalties in terms of either  current consumption or of investment, and that either one would, in the end,  cause some problems to them, as turned out to be the case.  Later, my own interest in this issue was very much the source of my interest in  the health care and pollution side of things in the Soviet Union. That is one of  the reasons I started Murray Feshbach off…Well, the sequence was Feshbach’s  demography work showed this change in the life expectancy of people. First, I  guess, it was just the increase in, I suppose, the late ‘60s, early ‘70s, the death rates  from certain diseases, increased infant mortality, a variety of things, coupled with  the changing ethnic balance in the Soviet Union, interested me in the problem of  the future demographics.  But the thing that I thought would have the biggest impact in the end was this  underinvestment in health care and the health of the population, because ultimately the population, its vigor… In the first place, just its vigor and vitality might  be undermined and that would weigh on the long-term competitiveness of the  Soviets. But in addition, it meant that when they tried to correct these problems,  a new claimant of overall resources would surface and compete in some way  or another with the defense expenditures. And also, this was something that  couldn’t be ignored in perpetuity, because the people themselves, I think, would  eventually see that their health status relative to others would decline. In fact, at  one time I tried to get the Voice of America to start broadcasting stuff like, “Did  you know that your life expectancies have gone down?” and so on. But I couldn’t  persuade them to do it. I think it was stupid on their part.  
- Q1: Why [Eds: wouldn’t VOA agree to broadcast]?  
- Marshall: I don’t know, they just seemed indifferent to this.  The pollution stuff, I think, again, is another big thing where they have underinvested, in the control of pollution, and are going to pay a price for the next 100  years that will be higher in terms of higher expenses, people [indistinct]. And it’s  those kinds of failures of investment that create semi-permanent handicaps.  Alright, so I had the sense that these resource constraints are very important and  had to be thought about in these matters. Just one anecdote: in the competitive  strategies stuff, one of the ideas was this notion of cost-imposing strategies. It  was interesting that one of the really most intelligent military officers, a man who  was then the Chief of Staff of the Air Force [Lew Allen, Chief of Staff, 1978–82],  wasn’t sure about this, that it was a viable idea. First, because his view was that  if we do something and we increase the amount of money they have to put into  the appropriate counters in the defense area, they would simply always find the  resources. In other words, that there were, in a real-life sense, endless resources  available to them. The long-term consequences were not, I think, part of his thinking. And the second thing, which was a good reason, was that we might start  something that we wouldn’t stick with and so we would stimulate activities on  their side which we weren’t prepared ourselves to counter and to deal with. And  that’s a very legitimate concern. 6 | Chapter 1: Themes  OK. The second intellectual theme, I would say, is that the opponent is not a fixed  thing, that is, that you can’t proceed by making a forecast of what the opponent is  likely to do over any extended period of time and then plan against that. Because  his responses… He’s not fixed in any particular shape. He has some constants limiting what he does, but not towards the… And even using several alternatives is  not fully satisfactory.  On the other hand, I think one of the early mistakes at RAND was the tendency  to assume the worst about the opponent. The thing that made game theory and  the minimax kind of philosophy fail in the end is that it’s wrong to, in some sense,  assume the worst—that he will be the most rational, flexible opponent. And this  led to a great interest on my part in trying to understand the character of other  states, the needs of opponents, the social-cultural factors that influence their  behavior, their choices, their [indistinct]. Also, I came to understand that history  affects their viewpoint, but more than that, leads to their organizations having  certain characters, certain structures, which themselves perpetuate certain kinds  of behavior, certain kinds of processes, and so on.  A related theme is that you need in your analysis and your thinking to take  account of his weaknesses and your strengths, which tends not to be the way at  least the bulk of American analysis has tended to proceed. It focuses a lot more on  our weaknesses and new or possible strengths that he might have. Clearly, you’ve  got to take account of that, but the actual functioning of analysis tends to have a  blind spot with respect to the opponent’s weaknesses and how to exploit them.  Some of our strengths, or his weaknesses—our strengths in particular—come  about because of special competences that are created by past investments, by  past history and experiences. For example, all of the skills involved in aircraft carrier operations would probably take anybody starting from scratch 15 or 20 years  to fully reproduce. So many of these strengths are the results of investment or  they’re social-cultural.  I was very struck at one point by Michel Crozier’s book—I think called The  Bureaucratic Phenomenon—where he showed how different cultures lead to different kinds of organizations and different kinds of relations within organizations  of superiors and subordinates. He showed how these things are very related to  deeply rooted cultural things that relate, for example, specifically to this whole  matter of how—right from childhood—superiors treat subordinates and so on.  The whole set of relationships that are inherent in the particular culture get reproduced in many ways in the organizations.5 This means, among other things, that  Soviet command-and control systems are Russian; the relationship of superiors  and subordinates is very, very different than in the United States and most other  Western countries.  Again, all of this is ignored in the standard analysis—well, that’s repeating—I mean  it tends to emphasize the opponent’s strengths. Especially the intelligence community tends to focus on new strengths that he might create by buying X, Y, and Z.  The thing to note, I think, in a way, is that this means that these strengths [and]  weaknesses are very hard to change on both sides, which led me, on the one hand, to feel that this usual contrast between capabilities and intentions was  not adequate. Because the tendency is to see capabilities as relatively fixed and,  therefore, intelligence people should focus on them, whereas intentions or the  behavioral sorts of things could rapidly change. And there’s some truth in that,  but the fact is that behavior in many ways is also very hard to change, or the way  you would fight, or the performance of your organizations, is very, very hard to  change. It’s not a matter of what kind of weapons you own, but the skills, the  capacities of these organizations. And, yes, with a new leadership, they could  change their views and the decision to go to war or not go to war might change,  but how they would fight, how they would behave, in many other ways is far  more fixed than this intentions-versus-capabilities simple paradigm suggests.  As I said, the intelligence community does not focus very much on weaknesses.  The first net assessment that was done was started when I was still at the National  Security Council staff, then I changed and moved to the Pentagon in the middle  of it, and when it came to the end of the study effort, the intelligence people had  been asked to talk about the strengths and weaknesses of the Soviet ground  forces. And the initial [Defense Intelligence Agency] position was that there were  no weaknesses. Then you asked them, “How could that be?” Their argument was,  “Well, if they have a problem, they will notice it and fix it. So it’s not worthwhile  taking account of it in any real planning.” I guess it was at that point that I said,  “Would that we were like that.” But Lt. Gen. Danny Graham, who was the head of  DIA at that point, when I explained the thing to him said, “Nonsense,” and went on  and developed a list of weaknesses. This episode is symptomatic of the problem.  Another implication of all of this is that recommendations about new, good  things that we should do to improve our posture, our performance, must take  into account the problems of implementation by the organizations that are being  asked to change. And again, most analysis does not deal with this at all, and tends  to put forth abstract best solutions. This is another weakness of most systems  analysis. When I was working in the mid ‘60s on this whole problem of organizational behavior and drew attention to this point, the notion was coined of “the  missing chapter” [in RAND reports], that never really dealt with this very serious  implementation problem.6  Alright, a third theme is a kind of model of how you ought to think about these  situations that are typical in military and national security analysis. That is, that the  whole structure of the situation should be seen as follows: there are actors—at  one level they could be states, at another level they could be separate military  organizations within states. The actors each have strengths, weaknesses, a stream  of resources that supports them, patterns of behavior that come from their history, the culture that they are in, and so on. Some of these things may change  gradually over time and be affected, for example, by differential rates of GNP  growth in particular countries. Also, each of these actors has its goals and its  strategies for attaining those goals. And in this sense, all of the actors need to be  treated entirely symmetrically.  Then these actors are set within a context within which they seek to attain their  goals and to compete among one another, or to form coalitions, whatever. This context has to be described in terms of factors that are important to the analysis,  but not really under the control of any of the actors, or largely are so. These factors  may include most aspects of technology. The demographics of even their own societies are seldom under the control of the leaders of countries. Climate is another factor.  For example, Joe Fletcher makes a good case that there are something like 140-year  cycles in the climate right now. Also there could emerge new viruses, other organisms, new plagues.7 These factors represent the changing character of the context.  It’s that way of thinking about things, the structure of the problems, that is very,  very important. In some ways, this is related to the earlier theme of, essentially,  the opponent isn’t fixed. You can’t just project his behavior and plan against it.  And then, the issue is on the strategies and other things that would determine  the interaction between the opponents and the evolution of the state description  of other [paths?]  A fourth theme in my life is the importance in many, if not most cases of looking  at particular issues, within this long-term competition framework. While there was  some of this kind of a framework that characterized some of the very early thinking that I was exposed to at RAND,8 and certainly related to the sort of thinking  that stemmed from George Kennan’s analysis of Russia, the thing that I noticed  when I resurrected it and formulated it in a way more adapted to thinking about  the analysis of national security issues in the late ‘60s was the change of perspective that it gave you.9 That is, this focus on the need to think through a strategy  for competing over an extended period of time forced attention to, first, a complex set of goals that you really have in such a competition, which, again, often is  ignored in the standard analysis, which tends to try to search for quantification,  to narrow down the criteria to things that can be focused on in analysis. It then  relegates what most people focus attention on, that is, some specific decision  or program, to being really a move in the implementation of a strategy in some  extended competition.  That together, at least for me, just transformed the way you ought to look at  many issues, and I think, in some ways, has been really very central to a lot of my  thinking ever since. And this thing itself stemmed from the work on trying to  look at the Russians and understand them, which led to this focus on not only  this resource issue, the constraints, but on the fact…[gap due to tape change] …  focuses attention on the multiplicity of goals that you have to think about, trade  off, to some extent, in making your decisions.  That’s maybe the wrong time. I was talking about the organizational thing, which  then led me not only to the Carnegie-Mellon University focus on the limited  rationality of decision-making of organizations, but also to the Harvard Business  School people, who were trying to characterize and understand organizations as  having themselves strategies for competing and succeeding in the environment  that they were in.10 And indeed, that one of the critical factors in the management  of a large organization was the correct specification of a strategy, which could  then guide other kinds of decisions and so on.  So it meant that when one looked at a particular area, like the strategic nuclear  systems and strategic warfare, intellectually you ought to think about what our strategy for competing in that area was, and then, from that, you would get a  clearer picture of how to think about specific choices, like this bomber versus that  bomber, or how many, the whole complex set of issues. It’s also kind of related to  some of the things that Jim Roche and Barry Watts raise in their criticism of measures of effectiveness [“Choosing Analytic Measures”].11 That, again, if you look at  real life, you see that particular moves or actions that one takes have a very complex set of consequences far beyond the kind of things that are reflected in these  measures of effectiveness that narrow things down, are very reductionist, and  tailored to try to allow quantitative analysis to proceed.  A next theme for me, I think, has been the importance of the nonrational aspects  of man. Now, some of this is reflected in this interest in organizational behavior  and limited rationality, the limited rationality not only of organizations, but of  human beings themselves, who can’t be fully rational in that there’s too much to  do. Then there’s the aspect that comes from ethology, where you see that man  is simply another animal, and is not fully rational, his action, his behavior is not  dominated by the rational part of him. Indeed, Lionel Tiger’s made the point  that man is an “action animal,” he is not a “thinking animal.” Man was designed to  survive in the jungle, where quick and reasonably astute decisions are what are  important.  In some sense, we’re living in a period where a new model of man is emerging.  Most intellectuals hate it because it does not accord as high a place to rationality,  and it raises what seems to be the issue or the insight that in some ways a lot or  some significant part of the responses of man to situations are “hardwired” and  have been placed there through the course of his evolution. I was talking once  with Daniel Kahneman, the very interesting psychologist, who made the point  that if you look at the eye, sight is, through evolution, one of the most elaborated and perfected of our senses. You can see when you look at the eye and  understand it in more detail how it is kind of layer after layer of adjustments and  adaptation to reach this level of accuracy and precision that we have. His notion  was that the rational, the thinking part of man was still evolving and [had] not  fully reached the state which sometime it will. You just have to look at the work  of Kahneman and Amos Tversky to see how fallible man’s thinking is, the kind of  mistakes, from a purely rational perspective, that the mind is inclined to make.12  And then you look at the work of Michael McGuire and these people on one  of man’s nearer relatives—where the most detailed work has been done—the  vervet monkey.13 You see how the whole blood chemistry changes by the social  status of the animal. I mean dominant animals have much higher serotonin levels  and so on. There even is some reason to believe their mental functioning is different. And we know that in other animals we have similar kinds of things. Perhaps  the most dramatic is a story about a lizard, which we can get into.14 And there  have been some tests on humans. Although, again, humans are frightened by  and don’t want to know about some of these things, but it’s clear that the blood  chemistry of humans is, to some extent, related to their social status. The importance of understanding, taking account of what are the nonrational aspects of  man and his behavior then leads to this interest in the analysis of what in the ‘70s  began to be called “perceptions,” that is, perceptions versus reality. This is central to understanding, say, the political use of force and its effectiveness, the political  use of military displays, the impact of the possession of military power on the part  of one actor on the behavior of the other.  I got into this work on perceptions, particularly this ethology aspect of it, because  when Jim Schlesinger and I were at RAND—he had arrived in the early ‘60s and I  had returned after living in Paris for a couple of years [1963–65]—one of the topics that came up between us was the work of Robert Ardrey.15 Ardrey developed  this notion of the “territorial imperative,” this very visceral response to certain kinds  of encroachments that people have. And this gets later into this whole issue of how  do you think about deterrence and so on. When I worked for Henry Kissinger on  the NSC, one of the things I tried to get the intelligence community to do—which  they did assign one guy to do some work on—was to try to understand what it  was about us and our behavior that the Russians paid attention to and focused  on, presumably because they thought it was important, what gave us good  scores in their books, and what things didn’t. The idea behind this was that one of  the things that we could do to enhance deterrence and to make the influence of  our military capabilities the highest was to understand this. And a little progress  was made, but it was seen as novel to even raise some of those kind of questions.  The fact that you want to raise them and move beyond these abstract discussions  that have characterized so much of the analysis at that point was driven by this  sense that these other people, in the first place, may be different than us.  Secondly, what they pay attention to, react to, is not simply a matter of calculation,  as much of the analysis up to that time had tended to suggest. If you look at the  standard deterrence theory, it has this tendency to think of states as not only  unified, but rational actors. Again, the supposed unity and rationality of states had  come up very early in this work on organizational behavior and was a bad assumption, because the behavior you were thinking about was often the behavior of an  organization, not of a single actor. A state might be made up of several organizations, and there’s this concept of the limited rationality of those organizations.  And you might think of it in terms of, say, like the Russians, wanting to know what  advice, what assessments, what evaluations the General Staff gives to the leadership. And even the leadership is not necessarily a single individual. This led to  a great deal of emphasis in the work in this office on the Soviet assessment, the  assessment of the Soviet General Staff, of the state of the balance, as being a very  central issue which is going to be heavily influenced by the specific character of  the analysis that they undertake, the choices of scenarios that they [make], various other kinds of assumptions, which can lead to differences in specific calculations that are part of any evaluation. And we have some evidence that there are  some very significant differences there. Some later work that John Hines has done  suggests that back in the ‘60s, their thinking about us was dominated by some  inferences they made from particular things we did and nothing about what we  said. I mean, particular choices they made.  The other thing—coming back, moving beyond this organizational level of  things—is, just at the individual level, there’s a lot of evidence that man is not a  fully rational animal. People have always understood that men have emotions and that emotions can get in the way of their thinking, but that model tends to  assume that at the center of everything there is this rational calculation, and it’s  just that these emotions cloud things or distort the functioning of this rational  machine. But what this ethological and evolutionary view suggests is that there  is no perfect calculator at the center of this thing, that man’s ability to be rational  is itself probably, as Kahneman would suggest, still in evolution and has built-in  short cuts, quick algorithms and so on because of the bias towards action and  behavior. Again, the work of Kahneman and Tversky shows how easily, by framing issues and questions different ways, you get different answers to what are  logically the same question.16 Then apart from the fallibility of the central rational  mechanisms, there are simply these physiological responses, the changes in  blood chemistry, which may change the behavior and the thinking of people, that  all need to be taken into account.  Because of Schlesinger’s interest in all of these kinds of things when he became  Secretary of Defense and I moved over to the Pentagon, one of the things he  asked me to work on, in particular, was this whole matter of essentially this political-psychological impact of military capabilities, military actions, displays, posturings. So I undertook to do this, got some money from the Defense Advanced  Research Projects Agency, and much of the program was done out at RAND  under Herb Goldhamer’s direction. There was an early meeting that people came  to, including Lionel Tiger, whose work I had read.17 He and Robin Fox had just put  out this book, The Imperial Animal, which I found very good and I think still is an  excellent piece.18 So we started down this road and had some general thinking.  We had specific studies using The Economist as a surrogate for elite views in  England and Le Monde as a surrogate for French opinion to try to look historically  and see what events, what kinds of things seemed to change and shift the assessments of the military balance between ourselves and the Soviets. Goldhamer did  that work.19  Herb began to write a book which, unfortunately, he never finished, but the first  part of it has come out as this piece, Reality and Belief in Military Affairs.20 After he  died, we collected together and put out in a publishable form all of his notes for the  rest of the book.21 He was a very meticulous gatherer of material and so on. A lot of  interesting insights come out of that. One of the more interesting, still further things  that came up in some of Herb’s work is, if you look at the changing cultural environment, you see a change in values. You see that early warfare was an opportunity  for individual men to perform heroically and to attain glory. Later, war became far  more a matter of having other goals. It wasn’t an occasion for the display of individual courage and so on, but was related to some goal of a king, a prince, a state.  And one of the most striking illustrations he gives—it was taken from a poem, I  think—was a case of two opponents separated by a stream, and one of them says,  in effect, “We’ll let you cross the stream so we can have a really good fight.”22 Now,  maybe it’s too romanticized, but I think he’s right, that at an earlier time that probably was true. So it changes your sense of what war and warfare are all about.  Another thing—which, again, came up in my memory of Herb Goldhamer—is the  point that we discussed, going back to these very early days at RAND, when we were looking at this whole “criteria problem” and related things, thinking about  the kind of studies RAND was doing. Herb made this very interesting, important  point that in all of these analyses, certain behavior is assumed on the part of the  men involved and, therefore, what the performance of the systems would be and  so on.23 The point he made very early was that in real life, there would be some  cases of unusual self-sacrifice that would alter all of these calculations. He gave  as his example, if all else failed, pilots ramming enemy bombers carrying nuclear  weapons and approaching the cities they were defending. And I think that’s very  real and almost all the analysis just does not capture that. It’s hard to know how  important that really is, but it needs to be thought about.  Previously, I mentioned one of the early kind of anomalies in the analyses’ criteria  was that in the early RAND bomber studies, they assumed that you couldn’t go  above five percent attrition per sortie. I found that arbitrary and tried to understand  the source of it, which really was World War II and the D-Day planning constraint.  And then to try to persuade people that this was not the way you ought to look at  it, I tried, from whatever memoirs I could find, to calculate the attrition rates in the  early aircraft carrier battles, and I believe that they’re close to 50 percent, at least  at the strike sortie… It seemed to me that in the kind of situation which was then  being envisaged, where both sides had some nuclear weapons, that if it came to  that situation, the casualty rates of the bombers could be set very high.  Still another theme—I guess number six on my list—is my particular notion of  how you try to look at the future. I’d say, first, that you really can’t predict the  future farther out. If you try to give a single forecast it’s kind of a fake, it tends to  eliminate uncertainties that can’t be eliminated. And in general uncertainty has to  be faced, managed, dealt with in some effective way and not simply made to go  away in some make-believe way. Unfortunately, much analysis proceeds on the  opposite principle.  But there are some aspects of the future it’s possible to say something about.  That’s, I think, particularly true of gross, long-term economic trends, things like  rates of growth of GNP, especially differential rates of growth of GNP. But again, it’s  a matter of picking the right experts. In that respect, Charlie Wolf has done some  really good things, and Bruce Scott of the Harvard Business School has been  absolutely miraculous with his kind of insights into how things were going to tum  out for Europe, say, in things he wrote as early as the early ‘70s.24 Another area  where there’s some chance of prediction that makes a difference is demography.  And there may well be also some aspects of technology, not all of it.  In general, there is a value in sketching out, thinking through some alternative  scenarios of the future, not as predictions, but as a way of enhancing our appreciation of the alternative directions in which things might go. But this creation  of scenarios has to be tailored to the purpose that the analysis is going to be  used for; there are no general-purpose scenarios for the future. And there are  some people around who understand that and do good work of this sort: Peter  Schwartz is an interesting person; a man named Clem Sunter, a South African;  Bruce Scott; this man Pierre Wack.25 A number of them were associated with the  Royal Dutch Shell Group strategic planning activities in London for a while. The other thing I would say about looking at the future is to recommend thinking  of it in terms of the model that I discussed earlier of actors with goals and strategies, interacting with some kind of context. For that purpose, some form of path  gaming might be useful. I’ve been instrumental in trying to get that kind of gaming created and done, beginning in, I guess, the middle ‘80s or so.  Alright, a seventh theme, I would say, is the value of gaming as a technique.26  There was a really early RAND impetus towards gaming. It grew in a funny way  out of the focus on game theory. People soon found that there were games they  wanted to look at or think about that were just too hard mathematically to look for  solutions. So an idea arose, and I think it was suggested by a man named Merrill  Flood, who was at RAND at the time, and subsequently at the University of Michigan.  He just made the observation that human beings are very good at playing games,  and can find effective strategies, reasonably effective strategies, and maybe the  way to handle some of these games that we can’t solve in closed solution mathematically would be to have them play and gain experience and devise strategies  and so on, and that could give us an insight into what good strategies are.  So there were games that came from that, that were strictly kind of artificial,  small games that couldn’t be solved. But that soon led to other games—I’ll mention several—some of which were then applied to much more complex military  problems. Another thing that it led to was political gaming. Herb Goldhamer was  an early innovator in political, or kind of crisis, games which I think the first one  of that sort of thing was probably played at RAND somewhere in the mid-’50s  [1955–56]. Herb ran that.27 And that led to much more elaborate and ambitious  games that Olaf Helmer and Norman Dalkey ran, big political kind of games,  and also led to a SAFE [Strategy and Force Evaluation] game, which was focused  around the allocation of budgets and kind of planning and programming for  forces, which was around the late ‘50s [1961–62].28  Anyway, I’ve been very interested in games from the point of view of an initial  way of getting some insight into the strategies that people might adopt in various situations. That led both to my interest in and use of some games in the  middle ‘80s to explore such things as the impact of an SDI [Strategic Defense  Initiative] system on the actual character of warfare, the results of which I think  were quite interesting in that they showed the problems of much of the standard  analysis, which then just missed, in my view, the really big impact of SDI. I mean  the impact apart from the things that people now talk about—the resource and  psychological impact it had on the Russians—which was that people changed  significantly the way in which the whole war was fought. It was as though its [the  SDI system] main effect was to change the character of the game that was played.  So measuring just what it was going to do to the attrition rate didn’t capture what  it was really doing. It also turned out that, contrary to some of the arguments of  the time, both sides, when they had some SDI-type systems, felt the situation was  more stable, which wasn’t what people tended to say.  I think the role of these games, as I say, is an initial, exploratory tool to try to  understand how changed weapons, capabilities, or something will change the  kind of operational concept, strategies that people will employ. An eighth theme or thought is that war and conflict are normal and natural. Robin  Fox had a very interesting, recent article in The National Interest [“Fatal Attraction:  War and Human Nature”].29  At one point—I don’t know how or why I said it—but Jim Roche then made a wall  poster out of it, I said, “I have a profound belief in the future of war.” Fox’s article is  particularly interesting in that he talks about how war ought to be seen like sex,  as part of life. It’s not something that’s unnatural that we’re going to get rid of any  time soon.  A ninth theme or saying of “Chairman Marshall” is there’s only so much stupidity  one man can prevent. You live in big organizations in which a lot of not-so-great  things are happening most of the time. And only so much of that can be prevented. So you have to be very modest about what you think you can do.  
- Q1: What rules of thumb have you used in picking and choosing which idiocies to  combat?  
- Marshall: I think in the near term it’s hard to change almost anything. I think the  things that you can change are longer term… This is really item ten, the strategy  for influence.  At the tactical level, a lot of the things are obvious, like, give other people credit.  If they steal your stuff—terrific! The main thing is to change the way people talk  about, think about the problems. So my notion is that you work on long-term,  more or less permanent kinds of problems and issues, and try, through giving  people better ways to think about those problems, to persuade them that this is  the best way of looking at it, these are the kind of considerations that should be  taken into account. And in changed minds and shaping the way in which they  look at problems, you gain influence. And for a lot of that, you can tell whether  you’re being successful when people adopt your terminology.  One of the reasons that this works, I think, in these organizations is that there’s an  enormous amount of competition for controlling or influencing the immediate  issues. It’s the nature of this government. Now, I think in a different kind of government structure, the strategy I’m suggesting would be less fruitful. But in our  current government, not simply the current administration, but the whole nature  of the U.S. government is that it’s designed so that nobody can decide anything,  and a decision that seems to be won one day is reversed the next day or next  week or next month. It’s hard to make any specific decision stick.  And much of this competition to determine what’s going to happen tomorrow  is, in my view, a waste of effort. Nonetheless, that’s what 90 percent of the people  are involved in. And it’s interesting that I think many of the people in the government don’t understand that.  An example I would give is when Schlesinger was here. This was the time when  some Russian ships were tied up and some barges were tied up near a Somali  airfield. A runway, I think, had been lengthened, and there were some buildings  there that people thought maybe meant they’re going to start emplacing some  missiles.30 Schlesinger asked me to go out to the CIA and to ask them to provide  their analysis of exactly what was happening. But in addition, he wanted them to go back and look at some other cases, because the hunch was that the whole  nature of the way in which the Russians obtained access and made use of foreign  facilities was rather different than our own, and that being able to explain that  would allow one to make a better case about what we ought to do, think through  what we ought to do, and so on.  Well, the people I went to talk with said, “Yes, yes, well, of course we’ll do something, but what decision is this information that we will be providing an input to?”  And I said, “Look, Schlesinger doesn’t have in mind any particular decision. He  thinks it just would be good to have this kind of analysis and insight into the way  in which the Russians go about acquiring access, making use of some of these foreign facilities. And by the way, don’t you understand that it isn’t as though there’s  some decision that’s going to be made next Thursday, because that’s not what  this is all about. This is an attempt to help educate the Congress and other people.  And what you’re involved in influencing is a long-term, gradual, social-cultural-political process. It isn’t as though a decision is going to be made next Thursday.  But people don’t understand that. They’re very captured by this notion that there  are decisions that are made. Now, there are situations where there are decisions  that get made, as in actual operational things. I mean, yes, you do send that  fighter over there, or you commit the attack on Baghdad, and so on. Right. But  most decisions aren’t like that. They’re really part of a sequence of things [indistinct]. There’s this long, complex process, and that’s what you’re participating in.  So there are delusions on the part of people, like those in the intelligence community, as to what they’re actually doing, what they’re contributing to, and so on.  Going back to an earlier point on the deterrence thing: The important thing is to  see the deterrence issue as an empirical problem. That is, here is this set of people,  or this country that you’re trying to persuade or dissuade from doing this or that  or these kinds of acts under these circumstances. Then the problem is finding out,  what is it that is distasteful, frightening, deterring to them? And that’s an empirical issue, it’s not something you sit down and think about. People just don’t look  at that.  Another point is this centrality of this political-psychological role of the military,  because most of the time that’s what it’s doing. It isn’t as though you buy the military only because a war is going to happen. We’ve just been through a long 40  years, when the whole function of the military was to deter the other side.  Now, it does it via its capabilities to fight, but the deterrence thing itself is the  result of the calculations and the reactions of this other set of people. So understanding that is absolutely central. And there are people, as I say, like Herb  Goldhamer, Jim Schlesinger, Lionel Tiger, and some of these other people who  have this new model of man, that all have something to contribute…or the cultural anthropologists. And again, most analysis treats the issues of deterrence  as entirely ones of, “If there is a war, how many targets are we going to take  out?”, which maybe isn’t entirely irrelevant, but it doesn’t get you focused on the  aspects of the thing that are probably the most important.  Another addendum—it’s really a separate kind of theme, something that I’ve certainly believed all my life, at least for the time that I can remember—is the notion that poor, mediocre answers to good questions are more important, more useful  than splendid answers to poor questions. That means that getting the questions  right is very, very important. Most analysis spends far too little time on what the  real questions are. Also, of course, most analysis tends to gravitate, to focus on the  questions the analysts can answer, not what the real questions are. There certainly  are dramatic cases of that. I think much of the whole effort on the Soviet economy  fails on that grounds, when you look at what people really focused on. Joe Loftus’s  and my experience at RAND was that the specialists on the Soviet economy failed  to provide useful analysis. We were trying to make these improved projections of  the Soviets’ military programs. We would ask these guys—who were supposed  to be the experts on the Soviet economy—the questions that we thought were  relevant. They had no answers to them, did not ever promise to give any answers  on those things, but went merrily along answering the questions that they were  focused on.  
- Q1: What were the types of questions you and Loftus would ask them?  
- Marshall: We were interested in the effect of the military burden on the long-term  prospects of the economy, and what the trade-offs were that they had to make to  support this large effort, things of that sort. And we just never could get anything.  Now, the other thing I would say on the “good questions” thing is that what’s also  striking is that even if you have the answers to good questions, nobody may listen. An example, I think, of that is that because of, initially, Feshbach’s work showing that one of the things that was going to be happening to the Soviet conscription cohort was that the ethnic composition was going to be shifting and there  were going to be many, many more of the Asian ethnics, the questions arose in  my mind, “Is that a problem? Are there ethnic tensions, difficulties? Do these people really speak Russian? What are the implications of this?”  So I had some people out at RAND, headed by Enders Wimbush, start interviewing emigres who had served in the military who could give their own personal  testimony about the kind of tensions, and also how the conscription system really  worked, in the sense of, after you were conscripted, how was it decided what your  assignment was? A lot of interesting stuff came out of that, including the sense  that, yes, they were going to have a lot of trouble, not only because the language  ability of these people was not good and, if anything, was tending to decline,  but, secondly, there were enormous tensions and brutality, and therefore, significant internal problems would result if they had this. The RAND group also found  out, first, that these people had been almost entirely, at that point, sent to the  construction battalions and forces, and to some of the MVD [Ministry of Internal  Affairs] divisions, because they might be needed to shoot Russians and were  much more likely to do that. Second, that when they were sent to regular combat  divisions, they tended to be cooks, bottlewashers, and not in the actual combat  teams, say, within the tanks and so on. This was the case at that time; later that  changed. So if you had a lot more of them, they probably were going to have to  move into some of these other jobs.31  The people in the intelligence community, principally DIA, just disputed the fact  that they, the Soviets, were ever going to have any difficulties, that they were simply just going to manage and handle this and there was just going to be no  problem.  
- Q1: With no further explanation? They just asserted this?  
- Marshall: No, just by assertion.  That’s the end of my themes. Maybe you can think of others later.  
- Q1: Those are very good. I just made a checklist for myself and I think that everything that I got here has been covered. Oh, I know… In reading some of the materials yesterday, there was a series of correspondence that you had with former  Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld about “centers of excellence” and you kept  returning to this need for these “centers of excellence” to bring up younger analysts, training them. And that’s something that you addressed in On Not Confusing  Ourselves. 32  
- Marshall: Yes, right.  
- Q1: We’ve talked about what makes for good analysis, but how about what makes  for good analysts?  
- Marshall: I think, and it’s reflected in that chapter [“Strategy as a Profession for  Future Generations”] that what makes for good analysts, apart from their being  bright and so on, is probably early exposure to some broad set of issues, some  broad questions in some kind of group activity, where real answers are required,  where they can work as a kind of team member, without a lot of hierarchy, where  it’s not a matter of, you know, the senior professor that does all the talking and  comments from the younger people are not appreciated and so on. So I think  that. Now, I do worry that there are some professional backgrounds which may  kind of inoculate you against ever having the right kind of broad look at things.  So it seems to me that the way it can mainly happen is through some early work  experiences. And I don’t know that there are lots of good places to have that happen right now. I may be wrong.  
- Q1: You think there have been more opportunities for that in the past?  
- Marshall: Well, there have been some. The RAND environment, I think, was certainly  like that. And I’ve tried to run this place in that way. And I suppose that Herman  Kahn’s place [Hudson Institute] was probably a good place for that. But I don’t  think there are lots of good places. I might be wrong about that.  
- Q1: One of the major themes you had in the original, extended outline was the  evolution and outcome of the Cold War, how it turned out the way that it did.  Obviously what you’ve been talking about today touches on all of that…  
- Marshall: No, what I was trying to do here was to discuss the kind of perspectives,  issues, attitudes that I think come up repeatedly and sort of characterize things.  
- Q1: That’s in a different category.  
- Marshall: I think so.  
- Q1: And then a lot of the examples that you gave bear on this issue of the interaction of analysis with the real world. 
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q1: But in particular, the theme of your strategy for influence, I think, deals with  that.  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q1: Would you mind if I made copies of your notes?  
- Marshall: No, if you want to. And then there’s this thing [Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., “The  Future Outwits Us Again,” Wall Street Journal, 20 Sep 93]. I clipped this out because  it seemed to me—I usually don’t agree with him—but he had some things that  go with this theme of what you can predict about the future or how to look at…  OK. Perhaps one final thing which I think about, and one of the most important  things I think I learned when I was at RAND early on is that the objective in any  analysis is to do the best that this country can do, not just the best that RAND or  whatever organization you’re talking about can do. One of the very good things  about RAND in the early days was that there were these problems, but a lot of  people from the outside were drawn in, both in the special summertime period  when people from universities and others came out, but also there were a lot  of visitors throughout the year. There was always a constant stream of people  like John von Neumann, and this one and that one, or this and that mathematician or physicist or economist. Since we were focused, at least in the Economics  Department, on how you would bomb the Soviet economy, what was the most  effective use of the limited number of nuclear weapons, people who had been  involved in that kind of activity in World War II, like Sidney Alexander and Carl  Kaysen and others, were brought out.  So there was just this whole attitude that, alright, here is the problem, what is the  best answer? What is the best solution? How should you think about it?  You see other organizations where they just don’t do that. They’d die rather than  bring in anybody else. If they’re given a problem, it’s, “What can we do?” So this  attitude is very important—and little practiced, in my view. And some of the government organizations are very bad on this or have changed. For example, when  I first knew the CIA, it was a very open place; it looked for outside help, ideas, and  so on. Unfortunately, by the late, maybe it’s the middle ‘60s, it had decided that it  didn’t need any help.  
- Q1: What precipitated that?  
- Marshall: I don’t know. Some of it may have been precipitated by the fact that,  in the beginning, of course, the organization itself had been brought in, newly  formed, people still had lots of external contacts, and later it had become much  more to be dominated by people whose whole careers had been in CIA. I don’t  know. Now, also, of course, that was a time of some estrangement from the  universities because of the Vietnam War. But I think it was related to this kind of  maturing of the organization.  
- Q1: Yeah, maybe you could talk a little about that, because that’s something that  comes up in your writings, it’s part of a cycle. 
- Marshall: I think that that’s true. I think it’s happened to RAND, too. I don’t have a lot  to say about it, but I think that it’s very real and deserves some serious study. And  it’s one of the reasons, for example, going back to this thing you were mentioning, my interest in forming new centers of excellence, that I would start them new.  I would not say, “RAND, we want you to reform yourself. Why don’t you do these  things.” Part of the argument I had with Rumsfeld and others was, no, you can’t  just… Look at some of these places. They ought to be small. They ought to be  embedded in some friendly atmosphere and not have to provide all of the administrative infrastructure that goes with an organization, like health programs and  retirement plans and all of that. And [they] maybe could be embedded in a place  that has some technical expertise; it could be used for consulting or something.  But I would start these organizations new, precisely because of this aging kind of  effect.  How and why it takes place I think is something worthy of study, but I don’t have  anything profound to offer about that. It’s very clear in the case of the CIA. It  changed its character almost entirely, I think. And also, organizations suffer traumas and they go through periods of low morale. Certainly when Schlesinger went  out there to become Director of Central Intelligence. We ought to talk about that  later. I sent him a handwritten letter.  
- Q1: Oh, I think you mentioned that. You mentioned it to me the last time we talked,  but you didn’t go into any detail.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q1: OK.  
- Marshall: But it was, when he went out there, already a very low morale place.  Again, it’s sort of a similarity between RAND and CIA. In the beginning, people  worked long hours, they were very immersed in their work. Later, it becomes  much more routinized, and so it’s an eight-to-five thing. And Schlesinger sarcastically—sometime after he’d been out there, I think reflecting on some of the  things I’d told him in the letter—said, “I don’t know why they put lights in this  place. You could be trampled on the stairways at 4:30, because everybody’s bailing out.” Organizations go through that.  
- Q1: But you don’t know of any work that’s been done about this problem in  organizations…  
- Marshall: No, I don’t… No. Maybe we’d have to call up some really good people in  the organizational theory, behavior area, somebody like Jim March or others, and  say, “What do people know about this?” But I think it’s very real. 

## Outline for 6 October 1995 Talk  
[Note: Italicized items were not discussed during the interview.]  
### Themes 2  
1. Importance of long-term assessments/long-term competition  
    — Structural factors/usefulness of  
        • Social/cultural competences  
        • Organizational/historical competences  
        • Economic growth rates  
        • Demography  
        • Lead to strengths, weaknesses  
    — RAND, early ‘50s  
    — RAND, 1969–72—>early focus of Net Assessment  
    — Competitive strategies  
    — Soviet Union endgame  
2. Importance of resources  
    — Economics matters, at least in long run  
        • Feedback into long-term competition  
        • Limits on actions  
        • Long-term consequences—e.g., Soviet Union’s health and environment  
3. Knowing the opponent is important  
    — RAND—AWM/limited usefulness of minimax. You always know something  about the opponent  
    — Don’t assume rationality  
        • Intellectuals escape from reality; focus on the actual facts about the world  
        • Exploiting weaknesses, developing strengths central to doing well/winning  
        • Long-term interest in sources of other models  
            −History—behavior of states, people—role of honor, emotion, etc.  
            −Bureaucracy, organizational behavior—late ‘50s search for insight into  Soviet military behavior  
            −Ethology, etc.  
            −Robert Ardrey  
            −Lionel Tiger and Robin Fox  
            −Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky  
            −Fits with long-term interest in evolution, man as product of evolution.  Rene Dubos/C.H. Waddington  
        • Belief structure of others may be very different from yours  
            −Soviets: Fuel-air explosives, nuclear effects  
            −Columbus  
        • Deterrence as empirical problem  
4. Importance of reality as reference  
    — Work with Joseph Loftus in the late ‘50s: What are we trying to forecast—  behavior of Soviet military/programs/forces? Product of complex processes  within Soviet government/military organizations/industry—>What do we  know about organizational behavior?  NATO, mid-’50s  
    [note in left margin of p. 2 of handwritten outline]  
    — Long-term competition concept emerges from relook at long-term competition in strategic forces in 1969. Ask what are choices of new programs—look  at as moves in continuing competition 
    — Herman Kahn-AWM: Model-oriented/theory-oriented vs. reality-oriented  
        • Physics/Edward Teller—experimental focus  
        • Economics—deli  
### Beliefs  
5. Some progress can be made on almost any question/issue  
    — RAND Soviet economists refuse to answer [AWM-Loftus questions]. First sign  of fakeness of effort/mid-’50s  
    — Even not-so-good answers to good questions better than good answers to  poor questions  
        • Feasible  
        • Obviously better if can do something  
6. Character of man—not the liberal version  
    — Product of evolution, limit to rationality  
    — Role of honor, passion—Herbert Goldhamer on bravery/sacrifice/air defense  
    — Status/dominance  
    — Lionel Tiger  
    — Faith in the future of war/conflict  
7. There are real experts  
    — Some people are smarter than others—some [?] exceptional  
        • Herman Kahn on Hans Bethe  
        • Find them/get them if possible (RAND in ‘50s/cost of wartime [protection?]) 

### Themes 2 

- Marshall: Well, the idea of this meeting is in some ways a recapitulation of something we did earlier, although while we covered some of it earlier I kind of did it  independently and then looked back to see a little bit about how much overlap  there was, and happily there was a fair amount, so there was some level of consistency. But the idea was to try to summarize what you might think of as “intellectual themes” over the years. So let me go through this. Now you’re, of course, free  to interrupt at any time, but then you will have maybe other things to add or say,  “No, no, no. I see you as very different,” or something like that.  So, I would say the following; it’s my notion of things that have been major distinctive themes in the way I’ve thought about things. The first one of these is this  importance of essentially looking longer term, anyway, taking a fairly long-term  perspective, both in terms of various kinds of assessments, or this long-term competition notion. I guess certainly this notion of competitions is very central, and  certainly at the beginning, early days at RAND there was this notion of looking at  ourselves and the Soviets as being in a very extended competition. That wasn’t  very distinctive, because I think in the early ‘50s, Eisenhower and various people  had much of this. So it wasn’t as though there was something very distinctive  and special about it. But, that if you’re going to look at that kind of thing, it’s very  important to consider social-cultural aspects of the competitors; organizational  arrangements and the degree things have derived from historical experiences,  historical arrangements within that particular society; economic growth rates  over the long-term are very important and are something to look at; demography.  Because all of those things lead to comparative strengths, weaknesses that determine one society versus another.  And, as I’ve already mentioned, there was this early RAND thinking that was along  this line. It unfortunately vanished in the middle ‘50s, or the second half of the  ‘50s. Then, for reasons I’ve discussed elsewhere, it recurred in my own thinking in  the period ‘68, ‘69, and led to this formulation of this notion of the long-term competition and the need for a strategy to succeed in these extended competitions,  which got transmuted later into competitive strategies, and certainly affected  my notions of the Soviet Union endgame, as it evolved, particularly the impact of  economic, demographic, and other factors. So, anyway, the first item on my listing  of themes for myself was this importance of the long-term, the importance of  looking at extended competitions as the context and all that went with it.  OK, the second thing on my…  
- Q2: Before you leave that, though, I think apropos of your remark that there was  really nothing unique about that in the early ‘50s, because the Eisenhower  Administration was looking…  
- Marshall: Well, or generally at RAND. There were a number of people…  
- Q2: Yeah, at RAND. That may be so, but I think one of your major contributions is  that you kept with that. 
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q2: It was almost like a strategic fad for everybody else. They were like, “OK, what’s  the strategy du jour,” or “Oh, my gosh, that doesn’t work, let’s do MAD [Eds: mutual  assured destruction], or let’s do massive retaliation,” or, other constructs. But, you  held, and have held, constant to that view for years. We’ve come back to that as  a nation from time to time, like with competitive strategies, and you’ve been this  kind of constant reminder that if you’re going to really think seriously about strategic relations with other countries and things that you need to hold this kind of  view.  
- Marshall: Right, although even in my own life there was certainly this emphasis on  it through the ‘50s, maybe a little longer than other people, and then this recurrence in the late ‘60s, of going back to it as very important.  OK, a second thing is in some ways related. It’s really just this importance of  resources; that the economics of the situation really matters, especially in the longer run. I raise that because it’s been my sense that there aren’t very many people  who actually seem to really believe that. I know in the discussions here I’ve mentioned before that in my conversations with military officers that came up, particularly in connection with the competitive strategies notions as they developed in  the late ‘70s, early ‘80s, there was a tendency on the part of these officers to see  the Russians as never having any resource constraints, that they could just add  on indefinitely. So the notion of cost-imposing strategies as having much payoff  was, I think, something very hard for other people to buy. And it has a lot of ramifications, because every society has cost or resource constraints, and the military  establishments have resource constraints.  Then it also, of course, led to, again, as part of this long-term perspective on the  Soviet Union, my interest in Murray Feshbach’s work, first on the demography  and the shifting ethnic balance of the conscript cohort of the Soviet Union, which  meant there were going to be fewer and fewer Russians, and people speaking  reasonably good Russian, and people with needed skill levels, and so on, and all  the things went along with that.  And it also led me to get him interested in and push him into this look at the  Soviet health care system, and pollution, and the environmental problems,  because it seemed to me in the longer term that no society could really ignore  the implications or the consequences of the neglect in those areas, because in the  end it leads to a weaker, less-typical population. I even used the crack of, “A farmer  may not care whether his cows are happy unless it’s related to the output of the  milk,” and even a totally ruthless nomenklatura in the end has to worry about the  productivity and capacity of the population below.  Then there’s the fix-up costs that then become competitive to other allocations  and resources to the military, and that that would be an important thing to  develop, not so much from a humanitarian or “Isn’t it awful?” point of view, but  from a kind of strategic point of view and perspective. Indeed, that it would be  good to try to publicize what was happening to the health and the life expectancy of the Soviet population, to heat up the demand for doing something about these things, as a drain from the resources available for the military. Now,  nothing ever much happened about that. It proved impossible to get the U.S. propaganda people, even in the Reagan Administration, to take such things seriously.  
- Q2: Did you ever think that the declining health care and adverse demographics  might not only affect the Soviet capabilities in terms of degrading them, essentially, but also might affect their interests in terms of creating internally generated  strategic imperatives to take other courses of action? I mean, not just creating  lebensraum, but actually, “OK, we’ve got a lousy health care system over here, let’s  go see if we can acquire one in a hostile takeover somewhere?”  
- Marshall: No, I didn’t think it would likely lead to that. I did think that it might lead  to dislike, distrust of the elite and that might have some longer term kind of consequences. And there were people, for example, particularly there was this whole  school of writers—I think they were called the “Siberian school” of writers—who  were Russian and, in some sense, very nationalistic at one level, but at another  level were very concerned, increasingly concerned about the environment and  what was happening in Siberia. And hence, this might eventually lead to some  pressure to turn inwards and spend monies on these things.  OK, the second theme that struck me in thinking about it is this one of “knowing the opponent is important.” That means not treating the opponent as some  abstract, rational calculator that we don’t have any data about, but which you  speculate what some clever other fellow would do. I always say, “I don’t know why  I felt all this,” and in some of this I don’t know the answer to, “Why was I interested  in these things?” I guess some of it’s just reading history. I think you can’t come  away believing in rational opponents and actors if you read any of that.  And so, I remember early on being very dissatisfied with some of the game-theory enthusiasts at RAND and the limited, in my mind, usefulness and relevance  of minimax solutions. It seemed to me that you always either knew something  about the opponent and how he might behave, or you could find some information about it that would be very useful, and so settling for this absolute assured  kind of outcome, independent of knowledge about the opponent and his preferences, was not really very interesting.  Certainly you don’t want to assume rationality. You need to focus on the actual  facts about the world and how people behave. Also, it seemed to me—again, in  this game-theory context—that exploiting weaknesses and irrationalities were  part of the game, and that game theory, as structured, tended to drive you away  from that.  And then for some reason, I’ve always had this long-term interest in other kinds  of models of behavior, other than this rational model. Where’d that come from? I  don’t know.  Well, one source was certainly an interest in history. The history wasn’t that  detailed. I mean, reading Arnold Toynbee, I think, had a big impact on me. But  clearly just observing the world you see that the behavior of states and some  individuals’ emotions, honor, pride, are not captured very well in this sort of other  thing. Then, fairly early on I got very interested in bureaucracy, organizational behavior.  This interest developed in the late ‘50s and was driven, as I’ve mentioned before,  by dealing with the puzzles of the Soviet military, and the kind of behavior that  you saw in terms of the kinds of systems and programs the Soviet military had.  I remember working with Joseph Loftus and saying, “Well, what is it that we’re  trying to predict the behavior of? It’s big organizations. And what do we know  about that?” Then you go off and try to find what people know about that. And  there already were some things that were being done. Fairly soon you get on the  track of Jim March and other people at Carnegie-Mellon University and they have  interesting ideas about organizations and how they behave and [their] limited  rationality…  Then in the ‘60s, I discovered ethology, initially through reading Robert Ardrey.  Jim Schlesinger was at RAND then and he had read Ardrey and we spent a lot of  time talking about that. Then I discovered our friend Lionel Tiger, who had written  a book on Men in Groups in the late ‘60s. And when Schlesinger became Secretary  of Defense I even undertook to start corresponding with Ardrey and we had a  meeting with Schlesinger and Ardrey and me on one of his visits here. He was living in Rome, I guess, and then he moved to South Africa.  And then, somewhere along the line, I discovered Daniel Kahneman and Amos  Tversky, and how we’re probably hardwired to make certain kinds of mistakes.  And then, for some reason, even much earlier I had been very interested in  Darwinian notions of evolution and read books by this fellow Rene Dubos and  another book by a man named C.H. Waddington about that.34  So this whole notion that Ardrey and…that goes back into the ‘40s… that Ardrey  and Tiger and these people were putting forth…or for that matter, when you talk  personally with Kahneman and Tversky and you ask them why these things are  the way they are, they go back to the way the brain actually functions and so on.  So it was just very natural for me to see human beings as the product of evolution  and of having certain patterns of behavior.  I also had an awareness—I don’t know quite where it came from—of the need  to be willing to accept that the belief structures of others might be very different  from your own. That’s certainly true when you start looking at different cultures.  I think I’ve mentioned to some of you—I’ve never checked its claims independently so I don’t know—but one of the most striking recent articles was this  article about Columbus and his supposed motivations. I mean this… Schama…  
- Q3: Oh, Simon Schama.  
- Marshall: Yeah. He wrote this very interesting article in The New Republic reviewing,  back in ‘93 [1992], a whole bunch of books about Columbus and making the point  that Columbus’s view of things is so different from anything we could imagine.35  I mean his view of the world, which Schama claimed—I have no idea whether  you could prove that this was Columbus’s view—meant that, in part, Columbus’s  exploration was not just a matter of gold and this and that, but it really was about  saving souls, which most people these days could not really imagine, but then  there was a different religious climate and a sense that the world would end sometime soon and there would be the Final Judgment, and it’s imperative to get  as many people into the Christian Church as possible.  Now that was a view I’ve never even heard before—I don’t even know whether  it’s true—but it seems, given my general notion that there can be surprising  differences in perspective, it’s not implausible. I mean, Schama is a respectable,  serious historian, and I think he’s reporting on one of the books about what was  Columbus’s view of the world and of life at the time. A modern American person  would find it very difficult to look at things that way and therefore, unless he  knows that this person has different perspectives, he would not even imagine  anything like that.  The last little note I have under this importance of knowing the opponent is that  it really means that deterrence or influencing the behavior of others is a very  empirical matter. Deterrence is not treated very well in the standard literature.  We tried to apply this theme of knowing the opponent very much in the stuff we  did on the Soviet stuff, in the targeting revision in the ‘70s [the Nuclear Targeting  Policy Review]. And John Hines’s stuff shows even at the level of the professional  military in the Soviet Union these surprising differences of assumptions, going  to such basic things as how big a crater does a nuclear weapon create and all the  ramifications of that.  My fourth general theme was the importance of reality as the reference. Again,  this somewhat duplicates the other things. As I said earlier, if you’re trying to  understand the Soviets and speculate about them and make projections you  have to certainly try to bring to the analysis as much as you know about the  Russians and so on, and about large organizations, Russian organizations—if you  can know anything—if you’re really going to do that. Sitting back and speculating  without any data about it is not very helpful.  There was this very interesting RAND study, which I referred to in other talks, that  in the middle ‘50s did just that and said, “Well, where are the Russian intercontinental bomber bases?” and put them all deep in the country along the TransSiberian railroad at the time when Loftus and I knew where they were and we  were not allowed to tell the other people that. Instead, we would say to them,  “No. Where are ours? Well, a lot of them are where they were back in the 1920s,  when the range of airplanes was pretty short and where we put them near the  coast, near our borders because we were supposed to be defending ourselves, or  where the good weather was.”  Even this emergence or reemergence of this long-term competition thing really  comes from a relook backward at what had been happening up to 1969 and  you see this kind of pattern of behavior on both sides in the strategic nuclear  area, and you see that to some extent you’re engaged in an extended kind of  move-countermove sort of situation, and at looking at that and thinking what the  strategy for that would be is an interesting thing to do.  Also, Herman Kahn and I felt that it was possible to classify people into people  who were model-oriented and those who were reality-oriented and most of our  colleagues at RAND were model-oriented. People get dragged into that and most of academia is designed to turn people into model-oriented individuals. This is  certainly true in economics.  
- Q3: Models are simple.  Marshall: And…  
- Q4: Would you elaborate for a second or clarify? In this case, by model I could either  mean simulations, etc., or I could mean simple-minded assumptions about how  the world operates.  
- Marshall: No, it’s more general. It tends to be that people start with some sort of  notions about how the world works and then they get elaborated and people  end up being focused on the nuances of the next little elaboration of the model,  but the elaboration is not necessarily connected with reality. Say in economics,  where people first start out assuming that all of the supply and demand functions  are continuous mathematical functions, and then they start saying, well, can we…  And then, therefore, you get to certain kinds of conclusions about how demand  matches supply and so on. Then they will start working on, What if they’re discontinuous in some minor way? And then, What if they’re even more discontinuous?  Can you still… [gap for tape change]  …And they become indifferent to data and what the real world is like. The  rewards go to people who can prove theorems or maintain findings under still  more and more relaxed mathematical conditions. I remember Herman saying that  what was interesting to him in physics was that even people who were primarily  theoreticians, like Edward Teller… And one of the good things about physics, was  that there was another class of people who did experiments and the theorists  paid a lot of attention to the results of the experimenters. And that wasn’t true in  a lot of other fields, where there may not be a separate class of experimenters, the  equivalent of experimenters. Secondly, even if there were, they might be considered such low creatures that one didn’t pay any attention to anything they did. Or  they’re off in some periphery of the science and so they don’t count.  Anyway, I ended there in my notes on themes, but then I had one page of kind of  “beliefs.”  
- Q2: Before you start that, as somebody who has invested millions and millions of  taxpayers’ dollars in models…  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q2: …maybe we don’t want to leave the impression that you’re a complete skeptic  on the utility of models, and I take it that the point is that, I mean, one, you should  always keep coming back to reality to kind of validate the model…  
- Marshall: Yes, yes.  
- Q2: …or verify or adjust, etc.  
- Marshall: That’s right.  
- Q2: But also not to get caught up in the model for the model’s sake…  
- Marshall: Right.
- Q2: …but run the model as an analytic tool to help get insights or guide analysis or  something and not get caught in the beauty and the intricacy of the model for its  own sake.  
- Marshall: Yes, I think that’s…  
- Q2: I mean, clearly you don’t have total disdain and distaste for models.  
- Marshall: No, no, no, obviously not, because, again, as in the physics case where it  kind of goes along in a healthier way, there have been phenomenal successes.  
- Q5: Even in these much fuzzier areas you…when push comes to shove, you can’t  get along without models of some sort…  
- Marshall: That’s right.  
- Q5: …you have assumptions, you have concepts, you have ideas about how things  work…  
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q5: Those are. in effect, models. You may not have three million lines of computer  code or something like that, but you’re still operating on models. But I think the  point you correctly brought out is you got to keep going back to the empirical  realm and check it against reality.  
- Q4: I like particularly the part about people who were modelers had different brains  from real people.  
- Q2: It’s a left side, right side issue.  
- Q3: Two points. One, I think the distinction between modelers and non-modelers  is very important. And I understand what you two are trying to do: rehabilitate  modelers. Let me reinforce the pathological tendencies of the models. If you start  with a model, you are consciously choosing to ignore a huge aspect [indistinct].  What’s the model do? Focuses attention: I know what the key variables are, I’m  going to look at those.  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q3: And I have to do that, the rationale is, because I can’t look at everything. Right?  What does Andy do? He looks at everything. The other way to approach it is: I  don’t know what’s going on. I mean this should be the caricature of a study. You  start out without any preconceptions—and by the way, that includes all them,  because you always have preconceptions. It’s better to have those preconceptions, model their explicit [indistinct] and focus on them and then you can come  fixate on them. But I think there is this ideal of having the best of both worlds,  having some rigor, in a sense [indistinct] what you’re saying, instead of having  this… But it does have this tendency to go off [indistinct] for reasons which have  probably something to do with the nature of people’s heads.  But if somebody met you, kind of at the age of 25 or 30, my guess is that they  would bet you’re a modeler.  
- Marshall: That’s probably right.  
- Q3: Because you like math, you like chess, you like these abstract puzzles. And by personality you are somewhat reticent, not diving right into the maelstrom of  human activity.  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q3: And you would think this is a classic mathematician, an abstract thinker.  
- Marshall: Yes, yes.  
- Q3: So what happened? I mean just because you read history books?  
- Marshall: Look, I mean, it’s true. Early on, what did I read? Well, like every boy, I  liked all kinds of military things. In addition, at that period, a lot of scientists were  writing popular books. James Hopwood Jeans and Albert Einstein had books,  and Ernest Rutherford and others had books, so I read all of those and I was very  interested in them. And then I read about mathematics, and got all kinds of books  and was very interested in mathematics. And then at some point I got also very  interested, though, in literature. I read this book by this fellow Ford Madox Ford  called The March of Literature. So I started to read Fydor Dostoyevsky and Leo  Tolstoy and all of these things. And then I read Toynbee A Study of History when it  first came out in the late ‘30s.  And I don’t know, you know. You’ve asked me why; I don’t know.  
- Q2: That’s your answer. You just kept reading.  Marshall: Well, and I also read a lot of philosophy, like Alfred North Whitehead and  George Santayana and F.H. Bradley and sort of general treatments of intellectual  history and philosophy and so on. So I don’t know exactly why.  Q3: I don’t want to derail the conversation, but when there are people like you who  are kind of good at thinking abstractly, it’s so alluring, with a few simple assumptions and propositions and the strength of my own head, I can figure out the  whole universe and I don’t have to know anything.  
- Marshall: Yes, right.  
- Q5: That’s the rationalistic, idealistic, fantasy nonsense.  
- Q3: No, no, but I see it all the time. It’s what draws in some of the best students:  “We’ll have the most elegant model, the most parsimonious model, [indistinct]  the one with the fewest facts in it.”  
- Marshall: Yes, yes.  
- Q3: That’s what they say.  
- Marshall: That explains the most.  
- Q5: Even physics, maybe in some ways especially physics, requires you, if you’re  doing real science as opposed to the silly stuff, you’ve got to go back to the data  and you’ve got to take it seriously and you’ve got to keep [indistinct].  
- Marshall: But it’s so alluring; I think the earlier proposition that the simplicity of  models makes them attractive is absolutely right.  
- Q5: No, no, I understand the allure. 
- Marshall: That’s why you get all these people to do that stuff.  
- Q5: I understand the allure. What I guess I’m pushing towards is a sense of what  Newton and company got started really being about, as opposed to what it  means. A really fascinating thing to spend the rest of your life fiddling around  with, but isn’t necessarily going to help you answer any of your questions?  
- Q3: No. I’m much more kind of [indistinct]. We will agree that, properly done, there’s  this good relationship between research and abstract modeling. We also agree  that there are pathologies that people kind of get sucked off by the modeling  approach into these kinds of austere and… at any rate, exaggerations from reality. But Andy didn’t do it. For some reason it didn’t happen to Andy, though if you  looked at his professional background [indistinct] interest in mathematics, training in economics and just this kind of way he thinks about these things…  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q3: You’d say, “This is going to be somebody who’s going to be another Oskar  Morgenstern or another Johnny von Neumann.” And, you know, just kind of push  game… He would be one of the premier game theoreticians. Like Tom Schelling,  you know, used to go around and say, “You know, Andy Marshall was really one of  the few people who really understood game theory.” But it didn’t work out that way.  
- Q2: No, it did work out that way. Just Schelling didn’t understand how he [Marshall]  understood game theory.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q3: [Quoting Schelling:] “I remember going out to RAND in 1959 and Andy Marshall  was doing this kind of transcendentally ordered preference schedules as a basis  for targeting the Soviet Union.”  Marshall: Yes, yes.  
- Q5: Let me maybe go back to something much more familiar to some of the warm  bodies here at the table, which is the issue of, you’ve now got the balance paper  done, and it’s 120 pages long, it has three thousand footnotes, and it’s just wonderful, and Andy looks at it and says, “It may need a little restructuring.” [Indistinct]  And…  
- Q3: “Why don’t you move the words around on the page a little?”  
- Q4: I never had that problem.  
- Q5: But it’s the issue of openness to—There’s a whole bunch of different ways all  this stuff can be put together and lead to—And, you know, that’s sort of—I mean  that’s the approach that you really ought to take, and that’s the approach that the  first-rate scientists, whether it’s Darwin or whatever…  
- Marshall: Yeah. Well, there were two things. I don’t know, going back, exactly why I  had one of these characteristics. But there were two areas that had certainly reinforced this or maybe led to it. One was the work on organizations, I mean in the…  
- Q3: Yeah, that was what seemed to be coming to me through these—I have six  themes—but whatever… 
Marshall: …particularly the stuff that people were doing at Carnegie-Mellon.  But then also the ethology thing, because there you saw in a very dramatic way  that up to a certain point people had all of these beliefs about animals and how  they behaved and so on, which turned out largely to be wrong. And how was  it changed? Well, it was some people who just went and watched what really  happened. And in fact, Konrad Lorenz edited a book that has a collected series of  papers—it’s not one of his major, mainline books—where he defends this notion  that at a certain stage it’s very important to just watch in great detail what happens, without preconceived notions, models and so on, just to see.36 He’s obviously responding to some criticism that people were maybe making at that time  or had made a number of years prior. And what scientists discovered, of course,  and are continuing to discover is both how rich, complex are the lives of even  animals that don’t seem to have any marvelous brains or even small animals or so  on. I mean just how very rich, complex the whole thing is, particularly in the social  relations among these animals.  So those two experiences of first getting interested in those for various reasons,  but then you get reinforced this notion of what’s really happening, how things  really function.  
- Q2: Was this before you went to RAND?  
- Marshall: No, this was after.  
- Q2: So, in a sense, maybe these special intelligence tickets would have allowed you  to view reality in the context of being around these guys creating models. You  had a chance to do the sanity check on these things.  
- Marshall: Yeah, that may have reinforced it.  
- Q2: I mean I remember this one story of Alain Enthoven going up to you and finally  going, “Ah! Now I understand what you were talking about,” because you had  access to these compartments that he didn’t…  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q2: …so he was kind of wrong on a whole bunch of this stuff?  
- Marshall: Well, there certainly was that and then that particular aspect of my experience at RAND, I think. But somehow—I don’t know, again, maybe it was living  through World War II, I don’t know—but I mean you just somehow get the sense  that you got to look at things, and also that surprising things can happen that  people didn’t believe.  
- Q3: Right. One of the things… I mean early on in your talk you said something like,  you said, “I’ve made this thing about knowing the other [indistinct]? It was always  possible to find something out about these things.” And most of us said, “Well,  the Soviet Union is a closed society, it’s got all these spies—so let’s make it up.”  But this kind of assumption you could go out and do some work, you’ll actually  find out something about this, which is partial and incomplete and imperfect but  better than…  
- Marshall: Yes, well that’s at the top of my list on the “beliefs” kind of thing over here. 
- Q5: Well look, there’s another dimension of this it seems to me, and this sort of  occurred to me three or four pages back, at least in my notes. It’s this issue of continuing to come back to very basic questions.  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q5: Is it an intellectual style, or is it just me making an observation? I mean I’ve had  you drive me back to much more basic questions time and again, because I have  a tendency to get on to the fancy, sexy nuance and that’s the stuff that gets disconnected. I mean I have strong tendencies in that direction. But you have always  and… Well, and the other dimension of it is just sticking with very basic questions  for very long periods of time. And it just seems to me, observationally, those are  fundamental intellectual characteristics, however they came about. I’m not sure  it’s knowable, although it’s interesting to try to probe.  
- Q2: Yeah, I mean you have this sort of intellectual tenacity, you know, don’t get  distracted and sidetracked, etc. Just really stays… And that was my point earlier  about you staying with the long-term competition when other people were sort  of phasing that out.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q4: I think that at some point, Andy, when you go through editing, you probably  need to say more about the economics issue and strike a balance between your  comments early on that economics really matters, especially in the long run, and  comments that you make later on about game theory, understanding the opponent, and your examples… some of your comments about how simple-minded,  basically, economics can be.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q4: I drew a strong message over the years from you about the fact that economics  really matter, but my sense was that economics as I was taught it, and raised, and  in reading about it wasn’t the kind of economics in 90 percent of the cases that  you were really sort of thinking about.  
- Marshall: Right. It matters the most in the sort of broad and kind of rough way at  this level of kind of macroeconomics. Of course, microeconomics is mainly nonsense. But the sense that resources are scarce and limited is important. That’s part  of microeconomics, too, but I mean that at this macro level the point is that there’s  only so much to go around and if it gets soaked up with one area it’s not available  for others and that that matters, and that there really are these serious limits.  Some of them can be bypassed for a time, but then you have these longer-term  consequences of having underinvested that got to get fixed later. So there’s some  very broad kind of accounting balance that you got to pay attention to.  
- Q4: Coming back to the point about always coming back to some basic… occasionally going back to some basic questions: Taking a look at economics the way you  just described it is almost Samuelson Econ 101 thirty years ago, understanding  those issues with more richness than the way they subsequently were developed.  
- Marshall: Well, right. But going back to the basic questions, I guess my belief about  that is very much, I think, how useful that’s been to really try to think a lot about the questions and what they really are. What the really basic questions are is very  important.  
- Q4: Were there a set of economists that you found most interesting? As a class, for  example, did you find economic historians interesting people, or interesting work?  
- Marshall: Well, again, I didn’t really do that much in economic history, although I  did some economic history. I thought when I was at the University of Chicago the  most interesting man was Frank Knight. He had some classes that were… He was  the person who was also very critical of much of economics, and so he would give  examples about how economics was crazy. He said, “Every farmer knows that one  boy is worth one boy and two boys are worth about half a boy and three boys are  worth almost nothing,” whereas an economist would say three boys are worth  three boys. And that it was crazy because the family was really the most relevant  unit, not the individual, and so on. So I thought he was terrific. Now I actually  spent a lot of my time, however, in the kind of mathematical statistics and making  models estimating… I wrote my master’s thesis on a test for the accuracy of predictions of a model that had been created, and things like that.  
- Q4: At this point in time were you a devoted modeler?  
- Marshall: No, I was more interested in the statistics of the thing. And I was interested in kind of the logical positivists… and so on. I finally decided that it wasn’t  clear that these models were saying anything about the economy, really. What  they were were predictions of the next number that would appear in the Commerce  Department’s summary of the thing. I mean that’s as far as you could go.  
- Q3: Epiphenomena.  
- Marshall: Yes. Well, it’s supposed to be related to the reality, but the Commerce  Department number is what it was predicting, not necessarily anything about the  economy.  
- Q5: Would you be inclined to say anything more about the issue of limits? I mean I  have sort of, I guess, odd views about the 20th century, because a lot of people  read the 20th century as there are absolutely no limits, there’s nothing we can’t  do. There’s an alternative reading in a lot of fields. There is, like mathematics that  suggest that there are lots of limits out there, actually, as a matter of fact, if you  pay attention. And some of them you can, say, you can wheel around to some  extent. Some of them you can’t do much with. I mean does that have any…  
- Marshall: No, I know about that, and certainly one of the most fruitful ways of thinking about things has been focused on these kind of limits, like conservation of  energy and all these kinds of things, but then exclude lots of possibilities. So I’ve  been aware of that, but I guess I wouldn’t say that’s played a big role in my intellectual life. I guess that what has interested me is the kind of narrowness of most  of the [indistinct] in the political and economics fields and so on, the narrowness  of most of the thinking about things, which tends to assume a whole bunch  of things can’t happen or are unlikely, which if you look at history, history says  happen all the time. So there’s that. So I’ve been mainly, I’d say, on the side that  believes reality and the possibilities or “unlikely” events are far richer than what  the theorizing and the standard thinking tends to suggest. Let me go on with these beliefs. The first one, as we’ve already talked about, is  that some progress can be made on almost any question, that even the hardest  questions you can make some headway on or be somewhat better off than just  sitting back and not doing anything.  
- Q2: That’s not a prediction, however. That’s an observation.  
- Marshall: Yes. Right.  
- Q2: We’ve shown that there are some areas that are remarkably resilient, like counter-command-and-control and those kinds of things in terms of analyzing…  
- Marshall: Well, I don’t mean progress in the sense of fixing it, but intellectual progress.  
- Q2: I mean understanding.  
- Marshall: Understanding, yeah.  
- Q2: I mean we struggled for years and years to understand…  
- Marshall: Well, yes, there are some areas in which that’s right. But on the other  hand, I don’t think really serious systematic efforts have been made.  
- Q3: You probably have some notion of just what a fearless statement that is.  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q3: Because I’m in the business about working with young researchers at the beginning and they would say, “No! What about the risk that it’ll be a dead end? What  about the risk that I’ll have spent all these years and nothing will come out?” …  and the lack of willingness to kind of take a chance and kind of… They’re ruled by  their fears.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q5: But you always learn lots from dead ends.  
- Q3: Absolutely true, but that’s not the attitude that they take. They want safe topics  which… there’s an established method for finding out this stuff and you’re guaranteed of some boring payoff, but you get some payoff.  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q4: Let me ask you this: Does that whole… Would you apply that also to Ph.D.  students who live in fear that they will spend two years of their lives and find out  their topic is dead?  
- Q3: I guess I’m contrasting the current crop of students that I work with, with some  of the people that I knew, and Andy knew some of them… more interesting academic friends who said, “Yeah, I don’t care. I mean it’s some interesting stuff. If I  work hard I’ll find out something.”  
- Marshall: Yeah, that’s right.  
- Q3: [Indistinct] “And I don’t know exactly how I’m going to do it, but something will  come out of it.”  
- Marshall: But I’m also thinking of it a bit from kind of the practical side, I mean  practical in the sense of putting you in a position to more intelligently speculate, a little bit, on one area. Again, one of the notes I have here says one of the things  that first made me feel that much of the work on the Soviet economy was not  what it ought to be was in the middle ‘50s, when Loftus and I had some questions  about the economy and how it related to the defense effort. And we asked some  of the RAND people that were at the center of this effort and they essentially  refused to answer, to even try to answer these hard questions.  
- Q2: Was it too hard or…?  
- Marshall: Well, yes, too uncertain, too this, too that; “We can’t make an estimate.”  And it was exasperating. My sense was that it was kind of unclear what this effort  was all about if it wouldn’t even try to answer these very fundamental questions.  And, again, I talked about this before, that it seems to me that even not-so-good  answers to good questions are better than good answers to poor questions. And  that, along with this “it’s possible to make progress on almost anything” belief is, I  think, very important as a set of beliefs in the way of going about things.  Then I guess the second thing is—which overlaps a little bit with some of the  other things I said before—about the character of man or mankind. I mean the  liberal view of man is just unbelievable. I don’t know where I came upon that, but  fairly early I decided it was just not so. Man’s character is the product of evolution.  There are limits to rationality, and the role of honor and passions is important. In  other cases I’ve mentioned this thing of Herbert Goldhamer’s…  
- Q4: Is it, however, an area in which progress is still possible?  
- Marshall: About what? About understanding the character of man? I would say that  progress in understanding the character of man is possible. I don’t think it would  end up going down the standard kind of view of things.  So, it’s certainly related to my interest in the whole ethology area. But it goes  beyond that, I think. Well, I suppose there’s that, and I’ve mentioned I know before  this observation of Goldhamer at one point early on in connection with these  people who were looking at air defenses, doing all their calculations, and he pointed  out that what was left out was that some pilots would ram enemy airplanes.  Well, at any rate, status, dominance—all very important. And so, I think all of this  is very important in thinking about the general character of the future.  [gap for tape change, Marshall comments on his belief that war has a prominent  future]  
- Marshall: And then the third one of the beliefs is, there are real experts. I mean that  there are some people who really are exceptional. Some of it’s just that they’re  smart—there are some people that are just dramatically smarter, more intelligent  than others, or have some kind of training or feel for things that other people  don’t have. I think I’ve mentioned this one case of—again, it comes from Herman  Kahn and came out of a discussion that he and I would get into. We’d concocted  various estimates to prove the failure of the standard economics, which tended  to say people are paid their marginal product. He was doing Monte Carlo calculations in connection with the bomb designs and noted that you could make a case  here with Herman Kahn, four or five other people, lots of computing time—at a time when computing time was very expensive to do these things—and Hans  Bethe, on the other hand, who could do these things with paper and pencil.  And it’s almost as though there were some of these very best physicists that had a  pipeline to God about how the world really was put together. Because all of these  calculations that these people have to make are approximations—you have to  choose the right approximation or the right…Many of them were, say, integrating  under some complex surface and you could get the answer approximately by…  because they have a lot of it concentrated in some particular spot. If you know where  that spot is, then you just calculate in the area around it, but you got to know  where that spot is in this complex surface, and there are these people who time  after time know. But there are all different kinds and so it’s very important to find  these people and pay attention to them. And it happens throughout one’s experience, I think. In the end, it seems to me that one of the things in one’s life is to  calibrate people and then pay attention to those people who have some significant  amount of this superior insight into how things really are. The thing that was really  wonderful about RAND in the ‘50s was there were quite an unusual number of those  people that somehow or another had been brought there in the Social Sciences  Division. You had people like Goldhamer or Nathan Leites, in his particular areas.  
- Q2: Well, they’re all in particular areas.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right, they’re not universal things.  
- Q2: So Goldhamer and Leites and who else would you put in that category?  
- Marshall: Well, I don’t know who they are in some of the other areas. I mean like  physics, you’d have to have somebody like Herman Kahn, who might have been  able to identify them in that area. But the point is that there are people who really  are just exceptional.  
- Q3: You said you’d calibrate them, by which I assume you meant you kept track of  whether or not they were right more often than wrong.  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q3: Could you talk a little bit more about that? Because very often the people that  you have found to be real experts were not the people who were nominally the  experts…  
- Marshall: Yes, right.  
- Q3: …so obviously the conventional scoring and reward system doesn’t…  
- Marshall: Yes, that’s true.  Q3: I think Lionel Tiger’s status among anthropologists is… he’s not… he’s too popular, he’s too funny or something like that.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q3: So how do you calibrate?  
- Marshall: I don’t know, exactly. Well, in some cases you would determine whether  they’re a steady source of insight in some things. But another thing is with  Goldhamer and Leites, people like that, they would have written papers and so on. 
- Q3: I remember you once saying about Leites… You sort of had been keeping track  of his views on the Soviet Union for 30 years…  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q3: …reasonably credible [indistinct]. So that was a more straightforward case.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q3: In some of these cases it’s a little more difficult to score.  
- Marshall: Yeah, that’s true.  
- Q2: I recall when I was here one of the things that I was always taken by was you  would always find these guys that were, like, the Central Intelligence Agency analysts in the bowels of the Agency that, you know, they’d been working on this paper  for three years and it never got published, because nobody could ever get consensus on it, but it was very, very important and seemed to be very, very interesting. Like Joe Backhofen and the work he was doing on Soviet fuel-air explosives.  Marshall: Right.  
- Q2: He could never get the darn thing published, but he knew enough to find you  or you found him.  
- Marshall: Well, I think a lot of that is if you are obviously open to that, or you’re in a  high enough place—or people have the illusion you’re in a high enough place—  they seek you out. But it has to be associated with a willingness to listen and give  a hearing to people that have a nonstandard kind of view or some new thing.  
- Q2: So you don’t find them, you create an opportunity for them to find you? Then  you have to be smart enough to figure out that they’ve found you.  
- Marshall: Right. At any rate, that’s what I came up with in my list of beliefs.  
- Q4: Let me raise one. It would seem to me that you… as long as I’ve known you,  have been very interested in what I would just call “strategy.”  
- Marshall: Yes, very.  
- Q4: Now it is clearly built into some of your comments, like long-term perspective,  the notions of competition…  Marshall: Right.  
- Q4: But it has struck me that you had—at least for the last… since I’ve known you—  sort of this enduring interest in strategy, how you think strategically…  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q4: …whether we are thinking about the right kinds… thinking about strategy the  correct way, and so on and so forth. And yet you didn’t really put that down as  one of…  
- Marshall: Well, maybe I should have. Certainly I’m very interested in that.  
- Q4: As a belief?  
- Marshall: Again, I guess in a more visible, concrete way, it came out of the early  RAND experience. Because in the immediate postwar period there was this whole issue of how are we going to deal with Soviets, what our strategy was going to be.  And then I first got into this business of organizational behavior, and got onto Jim  March and company—it was the very late ‘50s. But then I said, “Well, who else is  working on organizations?” and went to the Harvard Business School. There I first  came across these ideas that were being developed on business policy, business  strategy, and got very interested in picking up what they were saying. That all  continued and it had, again, a big impact on the longer run.  
- Q2: Did you develop a strategy for how you were going operate in the U.S. government? I mean, did you look at the U.S. government as this large, complex organization and develop a plan about how you were going to proceed if you were  going to be successful? And if you did, what was the strategy?  
- Marshall: Well, to some extent I did. When I first picked Chip Pickett to come to  work for me it was because he had been up at the Harvard Business School and  I talked to C. Roland Christensen, who was in this strategy business. And I picked  Chip because at that point one of the main tasks I had from Henry Kissinger was  following the implementation of the Nixon reorganization of the intelligence  community. So I wanted someone with this business school strategy background,  and someone who was interested in organizations, because what we were going  to try to do was change the behavior of these organizations. And so the question  was one of sitting up there and listening to their lying protestations of how they  worked for the President and, of course, they would do whatever he wanted, and  so on. You were going to need some kind of strategy for changing them and you  had to be clever about that and so on. So I very much had that view, based on my  earlier interest in organizations and all of that. So I was interested in it in that way,  that was very conscious, to have that kind of approach.  Then as we shifted over to the Pentagon pretty exclusively it was the assessment thing… Initially, we couldn’t get the assessment stuff going when I was at  the National Security Council because the Department of Defense really didn’t  want to do it and there was an elaborate rigamarole to even get the whole thing  started. When I came over here, I don’t think I developed a very systematic, conscious strategy, but I certainly knew that there were things that you didn’t want  to do if you were going to survive. That certainly affected this notion of sticking to  diagnosis; that was a very conscious part of the strategy. Based also on my experience from the RAND period I also thought that if you’re really going to try to affect  things—while it’s slower in some sense—the thing to aim for is changing the way  people think about certain problems, having them adopt your vocabulary, and so  on, etc. It also was important to take a longer-term view of things, and, in fact, not  to be very anxious or focused on achieving some great big, immediate changes.  
- Q2: I think we could all sit down and write the Andy Marshall strategy: keep a low  profile; don’t mess with programmatics and budgets; find smart people in important places, whether it’s your nominal boss or not, to service with your product;  have a little office on the A-ring of the Pentagon that’s got lousy furniture and have  an office half the size that you’re supposed to have; have a very small staff; none of  the trappings of power. I think based on working here, we could all kind of write  out… Now, did you sit down and think about those kinds of things consciously and purposefully and implement them, or did you just kind of evolve into those,  or did you understand them intuitively?  
- Marshall: I think it was more I understood that intuitively. People used to talk about  getting me up in the E-ring, which was farthest from my desire, I mean…  
- Q4: I never presumed you were actually thinking that way about it. I think that the  view early on among us was just interesting [indistinct].  
- Marshall: Well, that’s true.  
- Q4: I can remember secretaries that screwed themselves into the ceiling over the  [indistinct] Mr. Marshall [indistinct]…James Roche also doing the same thing….  which subtly, probably it made you even more useful because you couldn’t be  interpreted as a threat.  It might be really an interesting… It’s a great question. It would be almost an  unwritable chapter, but it would be really interesting to speculate on why Andy  Marshall as an institution stayed in the Defense Department for as long as he did.  I have an…always believing in one of your earlier precepts about [indistinct]  should be based on fact and reality, I have one good solid data point to indicate  that he actually had a fairly strong sense of risk. And that is that my next-door  neighbor was the president of Cort rental furniture, and some years ago, while we  were playing bridge, he said, “You know, I run a rental operation here in town.” He  said, “You know, we got a guy who’s been renting furniture from us for 15 years.”  He says, “You can’t [indistinct]. He’s never bought it.” He says, “You can’t believe  this.” I say, “What’s his name?” He says, “Andy Marshall.” I said, “Hey, I know that guy.”  
- Marshall: Well, I always thought that I would leave in a few years. I had no plan that  would keep me here very long.  
- Q2: In ways that contributed to your longevity.  
- Marshall: Yeah, that’s true, I mean…  
- Q2: Because you always were planning to leave and you had a home.  
- Marshall: And a related thing was that it certainly, was probably very important  that I didn’t have any children and always had a reasonable amount of money;  it didn’t matter to me whether I had the job or not. It was really a matter of, you  know, I would feel badly about if I no longer were Director of Net Assessment,  but it was not anything that was going to ruin my life or anything. But also, from  everything I saw at RAND, where I was sort of in the same business of trying to do  studies and change the way people look at things, I knew that you had to take a  very long-term view. This notion that you could write something as though it’s  kind of like a best-seller just doesn’t pay off. And so the main thing you could do  to really change things was to change the way people thought about them, and  that doesn’t happen quickly.  
- Q4: I think that’s another one of your observations that you didn’t make, because I  have it down here… fame, which is not… I mean I realize it’s in a way brought up  by your comment… But it’s this notion that seems to be embedded in your thinking over the years… some people would call it patience, but my view is… you just articulated it… it’s this notion that if you really want to change the way the intellectual horizon works, you have to be prepared for a long-haul effort.  
- Marshall: Yeah. Also, I guess it’s an advantage not to have ambitions to have some  prominent or truly high-ranking job. I mean it doesn’t mean anything to me. It’s  not anything I would care about.  
- Q4: Let me draw you back to the strategic perspective. My sense is that the real  sort of growth in your interest in strategy comes [indistinct] comes somewhere  in the… begins in the late ‘70s, mid-to-late ‘70s, when Jim Roche is here and you  actually… you do some things for the Chief of Naval Operations…  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q4: …when I start thinking of the examples of you getting deeply involved in strategy, strategic notions, concepts and so on and so forth, I didn’t see that much evidence of it in the ‘72 to ‘75 time frame. Starting around ‘75 is when I think things  began to occur.  
- Marshall: Well, I think that’s right, except that there was this whole antecedent  period and the stuff I did at RAND and so on, which was very much of that same  sort. And as I mentioned, I’d been very interested in the stuff at the Harvard  Business School, developing certainly in the ‘60s. So I was very interested in that.  But it was sort of, I think, Jim, in particular, and Secretary of Defense Donald  Rumsfeld and some of the questions he posed about the Navy that led to further work on strategy. We wrote papers for Rumsfeld regarding the Navy and  strategy. And then Jim and I, just because we wanted to do it, wrote this paper in  ‘76 [Strategy for Competing with the Soviets in the Military Sector of the Continuing  Political-Military Competition] on, OK, supposing the Pentagon wanted to have a  strategy, what would it look like? We wanted to make the case that the Defense  Department ought to really do things of that sort. And it sort of went on from  there.  
- Q2: Well, in part, I think that’s because you’d had this notion that net assessment  was about diagnosis and not prescription. And so, you know, there was always  this… at least you said to me you were always concerned about people doing net  assessments also doing the strategy…  
- Marshall: Yeah [indistinct].  
- Q2: …because you always cook the books on the net assessments to get to the preferred strategy, and so when it’s been…  
- Marshall: Well, not just strategy, but that they would have certain systems or…  
- Q2: Yeah, they’re pushing pet rocks…  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q2: …and things like that. So when from time to time it’s been posed that you  would also take over sort of Department strategy functions, you’ve been very  reluctant to do that. In fact, I think you refused to do it. I mean you sort of backed  into a couple… on helping on competitive strategies or things like that, but really  not taking the lead. 
- Marshall: Well, we certainly pushed the idea that one ought to do this, and to do  experiments trying to spread the notion.  
- Q2: But not do them out of this office, with the same people doing the assessments  also doing the strategy.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q2: That’s a very good distinction to draw.  
- Marshall: Well, maybe we ought to adjourn, sign off on this one. 

* * *

### Endnotes 
1 Eds: Interview conducted 24 September 1993.  
2 For background on the “criteria problem,” see Charles J. Hitch and Roland N. McKean, The  Economics of Defense in the Nuclear Age (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1960), 158–181;  R.N. McKean, “Criteria,” in Edward S. Quade, ed., Analysis for Military Decisions (Chicago:  Rand McNally & Co., 1967), 81–91. For examples of Marshall’s work in this area, see A.A.  Alchian, G.D. Bodenhorn, S. Enke, C.J. Hitch, J. Hirshleifer, and A.W. Marshall, What is the  Best System? D-860 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 4 Jan 1951); A. Alchian, J. Hirshleifer, and  A. Marshall, Sound-offs on Pay-offs, D-892 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 20 Jul 1950); A.  Alchian, J. Hirshleifer, and A. Marshall, Report of Cost Team Plus Panel, D-829 (Santa Monica:  RAND Corp., 20 Sep 1950); J. Hirshleifer and A. Marshall, Proposed Payoff Criterion for MSA  [Multiple Strike Analysis], D-817 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 2 Oct 1950); J. Hirshleifer  and A. Marshall, Revised “Best Guess” Salvage Value Assumption for MSA, D-820 (Santa Monica:  RAND Corp., 5 Oct 1950); J. Hirshleifer and A. Marshall, A Proposed Salvage Value Procedure  for MSA, RM-476 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 20 Oct 1950); A.W. Marshall and Stephen  Enke, The Substitution Value of U-235 in Two Assumed Strategic Campaigns (U), D(L)-923 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 20 Apr 1951), SECRET//RESTRICTED DATA. On the subject  of this report, see also Stephen Enke, “Defense Economics: Applying Economic Criteria,”  American Economic Review, 55, no. 2 (May 1965): 418–420; Stephen Enke, “Some Economic  Aspects of Fissionable Material,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 68, no. 2 (May 1954): 217–  232; and S. Enke, E.W. Lee, and A.W. Marshall, The Deployment of Local Defenses Suggested to  Barlow by Economics, D-935 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 11 May 1951).  
3 Marshall’s effort, with Joseph Loftus, to improve forecasts regarding Soviet military programs  was called “Project Sovoy.” See J.E. Loftus and A.W. Marshall, Research on Soviet Military Programs (U), D(L)-6500 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 26 Jun 1959), SECRET; J.E. Loftus and  A.W. Marshall, On Improving Midterm Estimates of Soviet Military Capabilities for Use in U.S.  Military Planning (U), RM-2892-PR (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Aug 1962), SECRET;  J.E. Loftus and A.W. Marshall, Forecasting Soviet Force Structure: The Importance of Bureaucratic and Budgetary Constraints (U), RM-3612-PR (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Jul 1963),  SECRET [Submitted for declassification review, Fall 1994]; Andrew Marshall, “Propositions  from Case Study on Forecasting Soviet Force Structure,” 20 Jul 1970, in Hans Heymann, Jr.,  rapporteur, Bureaucracy and National Security Policy: A Conference Report (Draft), R-644-PR/  ARPA (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Feb 1971), 46–47; Andrew W. Marshall, “Arms Competitions: The Status of Analysis,” in Uwe Nerlich, ed., The Western Panacea: Constraining Soviet  Power through Negotiation, Volume II of Soviet Power and Western Negotiating Policies (Cambridge: Ballinger Publishing Co., 1983), 6.  
4 The following RAND papers may be related to this effort: Andrew W. Marshall and Joseph E.  Loftus, Soviet Military Expenditures, 1955-1963: An Official Summary View (U), 0-6365 (Santa  Monica: RAND Corp., 27 May 1959), SECRET; Andrew W. Marshall and Joseph E. Loftus,  CIA Preliminary Estimates of Soviet Military Expenditures, 1947-1959 (U), D(L)-7085 (Santa  Monica: RAND Corp., 8 Jan 1960), SECRET.  
5 Michel Crozier, The Bureaucratic Phenomenon (University of Chicago Press, 1964).  
6 On the “missing chapter,” see C. Wolf, Jr., “Working Group I--Improving Policy Analysis:  Introductory Paper,” 17 Jul 1970, A.W. Marshall, “Notes on Improving Policy Analysis: Attachment to Introductory Paper (Working Group I),” 17 Jul 1970, and “Working Group I:  Improving Policy Analysis: Summary of Findings,” 23 Jul 1970, in Bureaucracy and National  Security Policy: A Conference Report, 57–58, 61–63.  
7 William H. McNeill, Plagues and Peoples (New York: Quality Paperback Book Club, 1993);  originally published in 1976).  
8 B. Brodie, C.J. Hitch, and A.W. Marshall, The Next Ten Years, D-2700 (Santa Monica: RAND  Corp., 30 Dec 1954).  
9 A.W. Marshall, Long-Term Competition with the Soviets: A Framework for Strategic Analysis (U), R-862-PR (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Apr 1972), SECRET. See also A.W. Marshall, Long  Term Competition with the Soviets: A Framework for Strategic Analysis, IN-21542-PR (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 15 Apr 1971) (CONFIDENTIAL; Declassified 7 May 1980). Although  published in 1972, R-862-PR was written between summer 1969 through the end of 1970.  
10 Herbert A. Simon, Administrative Behavior: A Study of Decision-Making Processes in Administrative Organizations, second edition (New York: Free Press, 1965; first published in 1945); James  G. March and Herbert A. Simon, Organizations (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1958); Richard M. Cyert and James G. March, Behavioral Theory of the Firm (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice  Hall, 1963).  
11 James G. Roche and Barry D. Watts, ‘‘Choosing Analytic Measures,” Journal of Strategic Studies,  14, no. 2 (Jun 1991): 165–209.  
12 Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, Intuitive Prediction: Biases and Corrective Procedures  (Eugene: Decision Research/A Branch of Perceptronics, Jun 1977); Amos Tversky and Daniel  Kahneman, “‘The Framing of Decisions and the Psychology of Choice,” Science, 211, no. 4481  (30 Jan 1981), 453–458; Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, “Judgment under Uncertainty:  Heuristics and Biases,” Science, 185, no. 4157 (27 Sep 1974): 1124–1131.  
13 Michael T. McGuire, “Social Dominance Relationships in Male Vervet Monkeys: A Possible  Model for the Study of Dominance Relationships in Human Political Systems,” International  Political Science Review, 3, no. 1 (1982): 11–32.  
14 For a discussion of the dominance systems of lizards, in which a “tyrant” exerts hegemony over  subordinate males, see Edward O. Wilson, Sociobiology: The New Synthesis (Cambridge: Belknap  Press of Harvard University Press, 1975), 296–297, 444–445. The fighting routines (displays and  postures of submission) lizards use in their struggles over territory are described in Irenaus EiblEibesfeldt, “The Fighting Behavior of Animals,” Scientific American, 205, no. 6 (Dec 1961): 114–116.  
15 Robert Ardrey, The Territorial Imperative: A Personal Inquiry into the Animal Origins of Property  and Nations (New York: Atheneum, 1966).  
16 Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, “Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions,” The  Journal of Business, 59, no. 4, (Part 2, Oct 1986): S25l–S278; Daniel Kahneman and Amos  Tversky, “Choices, Values, and Frames,’’ American Psychologist, 39, no. 4 (Apr 1984): 341–350;  Kahneman and Tversky, “The Framing of Decisions and the Psychology of Choice.”  
17 Paul Y. Hammond, Charles Wolf, Jr., and Peter de Leon, Perceptions of the Military Balance: Report of a Workshop, August 26-27, 1974, 1974, WN-8876-ARPA (Santa Monica: RAND Corp.,  Oct 1974), FOUO.  
18 Lionel Tiger and Robin Fox, The Imperial Animal (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1971).  
19 Herbert Goldhamer, The Economist’s Perception of the U.S.-Soviet Strategic Balance, WN-8991-  ARPA (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Feb 1975), FOUO; Herbert Goldhamer, Le Monde’s  Perception of the U.S.-Soviet Military Balance, 1948-1973, WN-9318-ARPA (Santa Monica:  RAND Corp., Nov 1975), FOUO; Herbert Goldhamer, “The US-Soviet Strategic Balance as  seen from London and Paris,” Survival, 19, no. 5 (Sep/Oct 1977): 202–207 (summarizes WN-  8991-ARPA and WN-9318-ARPA).  
20 Herbert Goldhamer, Joan Goldhamer, ed., Reality and Belief in Military Affairs: A First Draft  (June 1977), R-2448-NA (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Feb 1979).  
21 Reality and Belief in Military Affairs: An Inventory of Additional Material in the File of Herbert  Goldhamer—Volumes I-III, assembled by Joan Goldhamer, N-1726/1-3-NA (Santa Monica:  RAND Corp., Aug 1981).  
22 “After the battle of Maldon, in A.D. 991, the Vikings requested permission to cross a ford unmolested in order then to attack the English. The request was granted by the English commander.  The ground is cleared for you: come quickly to us, gather to battle…  Then neared the fight, the glory trial…  So they stood fast, those stout-hearted warriors at the war play…”  Reality and Belief in Military Affairs: A First Draft (June 1977), 13 (quotation from the poem  “The Battle of Maldon”, emphasis added by Herbert Goldhamer).  
23 Herbert Goldhamer, Human Factors in Systems Analysis, RM-388 (Santa Monica: RAND  Corp., 15 Apr 1950).
24 The Future Security Environment, Report of the Future Security Environment Working Group,  submitted to the Commission on Integrated Long-Term Strategy (Andrew W. Marshall and  Charles Wolf, Working Group Chairmen) (Washington: Department of Defense, Oct 1988),  3–10, 72–96.  
25 Peter Schwartz, The Art of the Long View (New York: Doubleday, 1991). Clem Sunter, The World and  South Africa in the 1990s (Cape Town: ltuman & Rousseau Tafelberg, 1987). Pierre Wack, “Scenarios:  Uncharted Waters Ahead,” Harvard Business Review, 63, no. 5 (Sep/Oct 1985): 72–89; Pierre Wack,  “Scenarios: Shooting the Rapids,” Harvard Business Review, 63, no. 6 (Nov/Dec 1985): 139–150.  
26 See remarks by Marshall in SRI International, Theater-Level Gaming and Analysis Workshop for  Force Planning, Vol. I, Proceedings, September 22-27, 1977, held at Xerox International Center  for Training and Management Development, Leesburg, VA (Menlo Park: SRI Int'l., 1977)  [Available from DTIC, ADA 068177]; A.W. Marshall, “A Program to Improve Analytic  Methods related to Strategic Forces,” Policy Sciences, 15, no. 1 (Nov 1982): 47–50.  
27 Herbert Goldhamer and Hans Speier, “Some Observations on Political Gaming,” World Politics,  12, no. 1 (Oct 1959): 71–83; H. Goldhamer, Toward a Cold War Game, D(L)-2607 (Santa Monica:  RAND Corp., 22 Oct 1954); H. Goldhamer, Summary of Cold War Game Activities in the Social  Science Division [First Round], D-2850 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 12 Apr 1955); P. Kecskemeti, War Games and Political Games, D-2849 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 15 Apr 1955);  P. Kecskemeti, Summary of Cold War Game Activities in the Social Science Division: May Experiment [Second Round] D-2975-RC (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 20 Jun 1955); H. Goldhamer, The Political Exercise: A summary of the Social Science Division’s Work on Political Gaming,  with Special Reference to the Third Exercise, D-3164-RC (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 1 Sep  1955); E. Schnitzer, Third Political Exercise: Summary and Documents, D-3639 (Santa Monica:  RAND Corp., 1 Sep 1955); E. Schnitzer, Fourth RAND Political Exercise: Summary and Documents, D-3163 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 25 May 1956); J. Goldsen, The Political Exercise:  An Assessment of the Fourth Round, D-3640-RC (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 30 May 1956).  
28 This may be the SWAP (Strategic Air War Planning) series of games. See Olaf Helmer and  Lloyd Shapely, A Strategic Air War Planning Game, RM-2105 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp.,  27 Jan 1958) FOUO. T.A. Brown and E.W. Paxson, A Retrospective Look at Some Strategy and  Force Evaluation Games, R-1619-PR (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Sep 1975).  
29 Robin Fox, “Fatal Attraction: War and Human Nature,” The National Interest, no. 
30 (Winter  1992/93): 11–20.  30 Schlesinger gave a briefing on these developments, using U-2 photographs, to the Senate  Armed Services Committee on 10 Jun 1975. See Senate Armed Services Committee, Disapprove Construction Projects on the Island of Diego Garcia, 94th Cong., 1st sess. (Washington:  GPO, 1975), 12–21. Schlesinger recounts the episode in Ben Rich and Leo Janos, Skunk Works  (Boston: Little Brown and Co., 1994), 188–190.  
31 Alexander R. Alexiev and S. Enders Wimbush, “The Ethnic Factor in the Soviet Armed Forces,” in Alexiev and Wimbush, eds., Ethnic Minorities in the Red Army: Asset or Liability? (Boulder: Westview Press, 1988), 121–195.  
32 Andrew W. Marshall, “Strategy as a Profession for Future Generations,” in Marshall, J.J. Martin, and Henry S. Rowen, eds., On Not Confusing Ourselves: Essays on National Security Strategy  in Honor of Albert and Robert Wohlstetter (Boulder: Westview Press, 1991), 302–311.  
33 Eds: Interview conducted 6 October 1995.  
34 The Dubos books might be The Torch of Life: Continuity in Living Experience (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1962) and Beast or Angel? Choices that Make Us Human (New York: Charles  Scribner’s Sons, 1974). The Waddington book might be The Strategy of the Genes: A Discussion of  Some Aspects of Theoretical Biology (London: Allen & Unwin, 1957) or The Ethical Animal (New  York: Atheneum, 1961).  
35 Simon Schama, “They All Laughed at Christopher Columbus,” The New Republic, 205, nos. 28  & 29 (6 & 13 Jan 1992): 30–40.  
36 This paper by Lorenz might be “The Fashionable Fallacy of Dispensing with Description,” in  Richard I. Evans, Konrad Lorenz: The Man and His Ideas (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,  1975), 152–180. 
