## Introduction ## 
The end of World War II saw just two great powers remaining: the United States  and the Soviet Union. Although the countries were wary, sometimes contentious allies during the war, that alliance was a temporary convenience. 

    第二次世界大戰結束後，只剩下兩個大國：美國和蘇聯。雖然這兩個國家在戰爭期間是謹慎的、有時甚至是爭論不休的盟友，但那種聯盟只是暫時的便利安排。


French political  philosopher Alexis de Tocqueville had predicted in the 1830s that the United States  and Russia would eventually become rivals.2 Competition emerged in the 1890s  when the two powers sought influence in Manchuria, and the 1917 Bolshevik Revolution in Russia added an ideological element to the rivalry. The United States did not formally recognize the Soviet Union until 1933. 

    法國政治哲學家亞歷克西·德·托克維爾早在19世紀30年代就預言，美國和俄羅斯最終會成為對手。這種競爭在19世紀90年代就已顯現，當時兩個大國都在滿洲尋求影響力，而1917年俄國的布爾什維克革命又為這種對抗增添了意識形態因素。美國直到1933年才正式承認蘇聯。

Following the defeat of  Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan, the enmity between the two nations reemerged in the form of friction over the fate of central and eastern Europe. The Soviets, who had suffered 20 million dead during the war, sought to protect their western  borders and to eliminate Germany’s capacity for aggression. Soviet troops occupied eastern Germany as well as several states previously under German control, including Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania, and Bulgaria. 
The United  States sought to rebuild a free and capitalist Europe with Germany at its center.

    在擊敗納粹德國和日本帝國之後，兩國之間的敵意重新浮現，表現為對中歐和東歐命運的摩擦。蘇聯在戰爭中損失了2000萬人，因此尋求保護其西部邊界並消除德國的侵略能力。蘇聯軍隊佔領了東德以及之前在德國控制下的幾個國家，包括波蘭、捷克斯洛伐克、匈牙利、羅馬尼亞和保加利亞。美國則尋求重建一個自由和資本主義的歐洲，以德國為中心。

From 1945 to 1948, Soviet leader Josef Stalin increased Soviet control over the  occupied countries, effectively turning them into satellites. Soviet actions in Europe and around the world convinced U.S. leadership that the U.S.S.R. was intent on expanding communism and was unwilling to compromise with the West. The Truman Administration resolved to oppose any further extension of Soviet influence around the world.3 Containing communism and countering Soviet influence became the focus of U.S. national security strategy and policy for the next 45 years. 

    從1945年到1948年，蘇聯領導人約瑟夫·斯大林加強了蘇聯對被佔領國家的控制，實際上將它們變成了衛星國。蘇聯在歐洲和世界各地的行動使美國領導層確信，蘇聯意圖擴張共產主義，並且不願與西方妥協。杜魯門政府決心反對蘇聯在世界各地進一步擴張影響力。在接下來的45年裡，遏制共產主義和抵制蘇聯影響成為美國國家安全戰略和政策的焦點。

To bolster Western European security and limit Soviet influence, the United States  began to consider a European-American military alliance in 1948. After extensive  negotiations, the North Atlantic Treaty was signed in 1949. In the agreement, the  United States, Canada, Belgium, Denmark, France, Iceland, Italy, Luxemburg, the  Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, and the United Kingdom agreed to consult each other about threats and defense matters, and, more importantly, to consider an attack against one signatory in Europe or North America an attack against all. The  North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) soon developed a military command  structure and a permanent civilian secretariat. Throughout the Cold War, NATO  played a key role in American strategy as the United States sought to counter the  Soviet Union in Europe.

    為了加強西歐安全並限制蘇聯影響力，美國在1948年開始考慮建立一個歐美軍事聯盟。經過廣泛談判，《北大西洋公約》於1949年簽署。在協議中，美國、加拿大、比利時、丹麥、法國、冰島、意大利、盧森堡、荷蘭、挪威、葡萄牙和英國同意就威脅和防務事務相互協商，更重要的是，將對歐洲或北美一個簽約國的攻擊視為對所有簽約國的攻擊。北大西洋公約組織(NATO)很快發展出軍事指揮結構和永久性民事秘書處。在整個冷戰期間，在歐洲抵制蘇聯讓北約在美國戰略中發揮了關鍵作用。

Another key area of competition between the United States and the Soviet Union  during the Cold War was nuclear weaponry. When World War II ended, the United States enjoyed a nuclear monopoly. Although the U.S. atomic stockpile was small,  roughly a dozen bombs in 1947, and the bombers capable of delivering the  weapons numbered less than 30, U.S. strategists were confident in the weapon’s effectiveness and assigned it an important role in their plans. 

    美國和蘇聯在冷戰期間的另一個關鍵競爭領域是核武器。第二次世界大戰結束時，美國享有核壟斷地位。雖然美國的原子彈庫存很小，1947年大約只有十幾枚炸彈，能夠投遞這些武器的轟炸機不到30架，但美國戰略家對這種武器的效力充滿信心，並在他們的計劃中賦予它重要角色。

In 1949, however, the American nuclear monopoly ended when the Soviet Union tested its first atomic fission bomb. Soviet acquisition of nuclear weapons prompted the United States to initiate a crash effort to develop the more powerful hydrogen fusion  (thermonuclear) bomb.4 The United States first successfully tested a thermonuclear device on 31 October 1952.5 The Soviet Union responded with its own thermonuclear test on 12 August 1953.

    然而，1949年，當蘇聯測試了第一顆原子裂變彈時，美國的核壟斷地位結束了。蘇聯獲得核武器促使美國啟動緊急計劃，開發更強大的氫聚變(熱核)炸彈。美國於1952年10月31日首次成功測試了熱核裝置。蘇聯則於1953年8月12日進行了自己的熱核試驗。

In 1954, the Dwight D. Eisenhower Administration adopted a nuclear doctrine  known as “massive retaliation.” The new policy emphasized nuclear weapons  even more in U.S. strategy. It sought to meet “the Soviet threat” without “seriously weakening the U.S. economy” by threatening massive retaliatory damage in  response to Soviet bloc aggression. The intent was not to rely entirely on largescale strategic bombing to deter and counter aggression, but to ensure that the  costs always outweighed the gains.7 The nuclear arsenals of the United States and  the Soviet Union expanded rapidly. By 1960, the United States owned more than  18,000 warheads while the Soviet Union possessed more than 1,600.8  Meanwhile, the Soviet Union and the People’s Republic of China, which had  enjoyed amicable relations and extensive economic and military cooperation  after the Chinese civil war in 1949, grew increasingly antagonistic. When Soviet  leader Nikita Khrushchev denounced Stalin’s “crimes” and initiated a process of  de-Stalinization, Chinese leader Mao Zedong criticized the Soviet Union for straying from its Marxist-Leninist roots. When the Soviets ended nuclear assistance to  China in 1959, relations deteriorated further. In 1960, the Soviet Union withdrew  all of its advisory personnel from China.9  By 1960, critics were also attacking “massive retaliation” as no longer credible.10 As  a presidential candidate, John F. Kennedy argued that the doctrine left the United  States with only one response to any Soviet aggression, a massive nuclear attack.  After his election, Kennedy adopted a new doctrine known as “flexible response.”  The plan inherited from the Eisenhower Administration called for launching all  strategic forces against cities in the Soviet Union, China, and Soviet satellite nations. Kennedy and his secretary of defense Robert McNamara, wanted multiple  options to respond to any Soviet challenge. In particular, they wanted to focus  more on destroying Soviet military forces and less on cities. They also wanted  to consider the growing Sino-Soviet split and avoid destroying Chinese targets  unnecessarily. Simultaneously, the Kennedy Administration sought to increase  spending on non-nuclear forces in order to bolster U.S. capability to conduct  limited wars without the need to employ nuclear weapons.11  The competition between the United States and the Soviet Union extended well  beyond the Eurasian landmass. In an effort to deter U.S. interference in the affairs  of a regional ally and to increase Soviet nuclear strike capability, Khrushchev  agreed to deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba in 1962. U.S. surveillance flights soon  discovered the construction of the missile sites, precipitating the Cuban Missile Crisis. After discussing several options, ranging from a stern warning to airstrikes  followed by an invasion, Kennedy ordered a naval quarantine of Cuba to prevent  the delivery of further missiles, and demanded the sites under construction be  dismantled. Tensions ran high for several days but negotiations eventually brought  an agreement: the Soviets would withdraw their offensive weapons from Cuba  and the United States would publicly agree not to invade Cuba. The crisis was the  closest the United States and the Soviet Union had ever come to war.  The contest between the superpowers also spread to Asia. The victory of the communist-led Vietminh army over French forces at Dien Bien Phu in 1954 led to the  creation of a Communist Vietnam north of the 17th parallel and a non-Communist  state south of the line. The United States sought to stem the tide of communism  and soon became the primary supporter of the South Vietnamese regime. By  1963, more than 16,000 U.S. military advisors were in Vietnam. In 1964, Congress  passed the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution authorizing President Lyndon B. Johnson to  use armed force to protect U.S. forces and to deter aggression from North Vietnam.  U.S. combat forces subsequently flowed into the theater in large numbers: by  1968, nearly 550,000 U.S. troops had deployed to Vietnam. The significant commitment of troops and resources to Vietnam left fewer resources available for  other efforts to compete with the Soviet Union.

### Early 1950s

- Marshall: I came to RAND in January of ‘49, straight from graduate school at the  University of Chicago. All through ‘49 what I worked on was a project with Herb  Goldhamer.13 The idea behind the project was that in both world wars, a substantial number of people were rejected for mental, psychological reasons. Seemingly,  the raw data showed that there was a significant increase in the percentage  that were rejected in World War II as compared with World War I. And the issue  was—all being dressed in the notion that the next war, the most likely version of  it, was very much another war like World War II with a major mobilization and so  on—Is this a trend that needs to be taken account of when we look at manpower  resources? So that was the focus.  
- Q1: Who asked for the study?  
- Marshall: It was generated within RAND, and was something that Herb wanted to  work on. I think, realistically, it probably was also that RAND very much wanted  Herb to join them, and this was what he wanted to work on, so have him work on  that for a while. He had wanted some statistical help in doing that, and asked  Allen Wallis, who then referred him to me. He interviewed me, and I came to RAND,  both because I didn’t know very much about RAND—or hardly anything; it was  just being formed, in some respects—but also it had one important, interesting  feature: the salary offer was about 50 percent above the other offer I had.  And Herb was obviously a very intellectually interesting guy. He was just a wonderful man and we became very close friends.14 So I went to RAND, but it was kind  of happenstance.  It was in ‘49, while I was working on this project that, because of a man named  Russ Nichols, who was an economist, the representative in the RAND Washington  office of the Economics Department that was also just forming up, I learned more  about what the rest of RAND was really doing. Then I began in early ‘50 to transition to some other things, and gradually moved into the mainstream of what  RAND was doing.  We still had, at least during the first nine months of ‘49, a sense of a monopoly  on nuclear weapons, a vision of what the war would be like if it were to occur.  But this, of course, all rapidly changed during the ‘50s as the Russians got nuclear  weapons; not only got a few, but both sides began to accumulate very substantial  numbers.  Thermonuclear weapons were invented, which upped the potential scale of the  destruction.  The progression of things that I got involved in, and the kind of intellectual problems that were encountered, goes from the general “criteria problem” for some  of the RAND studies, and then a lot into targeting, and then into intelligence  matters, strategic warning issues.15 Then…well, then there was an interlude when  I got married and went off to the University of Chicago to teach for a year.  
- Q1: What year was that? 
- Marshall: It was the academic year ‘53–’54.  Then when I came back, I got involved in this effort which led to The Next Ten  Years paper.16 I also worked with another man on tactical nukes and Europe and  target—17  
- Q1: What was his name?  
- Marshall: Harvey DeWeerd.  And then I ran a study on reconnaissance, using Monte Carlo methods to look at  the effect of reconnaissance on the efficiency of bombing.18 Then Joe Loftus and  I started this Project Sovoy, which has a long history, but was probably the first  really big intellectually interesting thing I did.19  
- Q1: What does “Sovoy” stand for?  
- Marshall: “Soviet military” [Sovetskiye Voyska]. It was an effort to supply, I think  as we discussed last time, better inputs for the RAND studies. And it led us into  this question, “How do you make better projections of future Soviet programs?”  Which, in turn, led you both to this further interest in the budgeting constraints,  resource constraints and how to take account of those, as well as to the issue of  organizational behavior, because what you were really looking at was the behavior of some large, complex organizations that created and operated these things.  And then I got involved in the Gaither Committee activities of ‘57, and wrote,  when I got back, this Goldhamer-Marshall-Nathan Leites piece [The Deterrence  and Strategy of Total War, 1959–1961], and then went to the first part of the Surprise Attack Conference in Geneva in ‘58.20  At the end of the period, I was involved in the so-called “SOFS” [Strategic Offensive Forces Study] study in ‘59, ‘60.21  
- Q1: Did you have much interaction at that time with other people at RAND?  
- Marshall: Not a lot. Herb and I made a trip out to RAND, probably from the middle  of September through the middle of October. And then I got to know a lot of people, although the biggest mechanism for that was Kriegspiel. I think I’d mentioned  earlier that Herb had been the junior chess champion of Canada. He and I used to  play occasionally, but not very much. We’d have lunch or something like that and  play some rapid transit games. But when we got out there, Herb had already met  John Williams, who was really one of the leading, most interesting people at RAND.  He was at the head of the Mathematics Department, although his own professional  background had been in astronomy. He was the center of a very lively Kriegspiel  activity, which went on not only during lunchtime, but at his home in the evenings.  In fact, we spent maybe three or four nights a week at his house in Pacific Palisades  playing. And I got to meet a few people, but the main purpose of the trip was related to the mental health project. You see, we had collected a bunch of data, and various statistical analyses and data processing was going on, but in Santa Monica.  A lot of my work was writing out the instructions, from Washington, and sending  the instructions to them about how the data should be broken down and analyzed. A great deal was done on that. Now, of course, there were always lunchtime  discussions with people and then that was a lot more talk about military things. 
- Q1: Any recollections of what some of the subjects of discussion were?  
- Marshall: The thing I most remember was that the people at RAND had a rather  different view of what the war plan, at least for nuclear weapons, ought to be like.  The military establishment focused on a kind of the—Another fellow, an Air Force  officer who said he wrote the first war plan, mentioned to me once that it was like  the last “max effort” raid of World War II. The whole idea was to deliver as quickly  as possible all of the weapons against—at that point, prior to their getting nuclear  weapons—basically the Soviet economy. Whereas at least as early as ‘50, late ‘49,  certainly no later than ‘50, there were people around RAND writing about another  way of using these limited number of weapons, which, for example, would have  been to have made a few attacks, but then distribute leaflets saying, “Evacuate the  cities,” or also getting the government to try to surrender.  
- Q1: This was the “Warbo” [“Warning and Bombing”] study?22  
- Marshall: Yeah. And, say, somebody like Herb, even though he wasn’t directly involved  in the Warbo study, had interesting things to say and talked with people about that.  Then, of course, you had—I don’t know the exact timing of this—Bernard Brodie  coming on board.23 Now, he had, because of his earlier work, some access to the  actual war plan, and had, I think, written, talked with [Gen. Lauris] Norstad [Air  Force Deputy Chief of Staff] about it, and [Gen. Hoyt] Vandenberg [Air Force Chief  of Staff], and had also been critical.24 And clearly, later….One of the things you’ll  most want to read is, for example, his, I think it’s about a ‘52 or ‘53 [Sep 1951]  paper called “Must We Shoot from the Hip?”25  Another part of the discussion at RAND during these early years was the subject  of preventive attack. There were a set of people, including Williams, who were for  kind of preemptive war, just as there were some Air Force officers, and, in fact, for  that matter, John von Neumann.26  
- Q1: What was the Stalking the Tiger [“Hunting the Tiger (and Other Aspects of the  Active Life)”] paper?27  
- Marshall: And that’s another one you want to read. It’s by Williams.  Another interesting thing that was done during this time was that soon after  the thermonuclear weapon, which proved successful, von Neumann was very  interested in using it to affect the climate, because if you look at the world, if you  can shift the temperature of the earth a couple of degrees, you, in effect, drive  the Soviets out of agriculture.28 So there was an interest in looking at Krakatoa  and other large volcanic things. After these eruptions, you see the effects through  a couple of years, and it does change things, and you get these things of the…I  forget what…the “summer without sun” and various things.  
- Q1: These studies were done at RAND?  
- Marshall: Von Neumann was quite interested in this, and then some—I don’t  whether they were real studies, but I remember, though, people getting ahold of  these old weather reports and looking at them.  And RAND did have a weather group then, headed by a guy named William  Kellogg, who was very good. They had several very good people. They were also much involved with this project to do reconnaissance from balloons, when you  had to then predict the track of the balloons and where to release them and so  on. That was called, I think, Project SINBAD.29  So there were all of these very interesting things going on. And there also was  game theory and all of the efforts to think about and use game theory.  
- Q1: How influential was that in the early years, game theory?  
- Marshall: It was fairly influential, in the sense of people saying, OK, here’s this new  intellectual tool or way of looking at things, and how can we adapt it and use it.  People tried to do analytic work, develop ways of actually using it in warfare. But  most of that never turned out. Warfare is just too complex. But the ideas, the kind  of intellectual framework that it supplied was fairly influential.  And it had another effect, which was, I think, very important for RAND. I think  the man who first pushed the idea, which was then taken up by some others,  was named Merrill Flood. His notion was that even if you couldn’t get analytic  solutions to [indistinct] games, human beings have great skill at playing games,  so have people play these games to try to discover what the good strategies are,  even though you cannot analytically derive them.  That was done, first on a small scale, with simple games that were still nonetheless beyond analytic solution, but then, as early as the ‘54 time period, when I got  back to RAND, there already was underway a game that was called SAW, Strategic Air War; I think that was probably the acronym for it. Alex Mood, who was a  statistician was kind of the father of that. The SAW game was being used to look  at the broadest kind of strategic questions as to the use of weapons and so on in a  situation where the war starts as a ground war in Europe.30  In fact, it [SAW] was done somewhat in conjunction with this The Next Ten Years  effort.31 The Next Ten Years, of course, is the name of a paper. There was a group  that was called the Strategic Objectives Committee that I and…really chaired by  Charles Hitch, I guess…Hitch and Williams. And I was on it, Mood was on it…I  forget who…Brodie.32 What it was supposed to do was to reexamine, “What are  our strategic objectives? What are the really big issues and questions that we  at RAND ought to be addressing, or our work ought to serve as some help in  addressing?”  Mood ran these games. Now, Hitch didn’t quite think they were adequate, and I  know he was anxious at one point about these games being pushed too much  by these people, or the results of them. But the only output from the thing was  this The Next Ten Years paper, which Hitch and Brodie and I wrote. It was circulated  and people commented on it, but we were the basic drafters and not much was  changed.  
- Q1: This was the only effort of the Strategic Objectives Committee?  
- Marshall: Yes, at least the only output I can remember.  
- Q1: And how was it received?  
- Marshall: I think well, but I don’t know, again, how operationally effective it was.33 
- Q1: Do you think it influenced the direction and the content of the research program at RAND?  
- Marshall: Some, but I think not necessarily a lot.  
- Q1: Was there distribution outside of RAND?  
- Marshall: As I remember, it was only an internal RAND document. A few copies may  have gotten out, but it was directed inward to RAND people.  
- Q1: Does The Next Ten Years give a good summary of the discussions within the  Strategic Objectives Committee?  
- Marshall: Yes, I think so.  
- Q1: There aren’t any things that you talked about in the group that aren’t touched  on in The Next Ten Years?  
- Marshall: I don’t think so. Well, there were some things. For example, as part of this  effort, I remember I was asked to try to reconstruct the size of the U.S. nuclear  stockpile. It turned out to be possible because of some inadvertent disclosures  at one point. Then there were things that were kind of fuzzed up, but once you  knew certain base numbers… I mean when people in testifying about some new  separation plant would talk about the improvement in efficiency of the barriers,  and things of this sort. The actual numbers, of course, were very highly classified  at that time. But this was an effort to do that. So there were things like that that  didn’t specifically get included in The Next Ten Years. And there were these various  games, as I say, that were run.  But game theory as such, I think, gradually died out, weakened in effect, by the  middle, late ‘50s. But it was very active initially, the belief that it could be useful,  could eventually be applied.  
- Q1: What were the hopes? Ideally, what results did people want these game theory  analyses to yield?  
- Marshall: I’m not sure I can really reconstruct that.  
- Q1: But there were high hopes.  
- Marshall: Yes, there were. Or there certainly were people who thought that it would  allow us to think better about things. And you know, in a way, some of the ideas got  incorporated into people’s thinking. But the very direct applications were very few.  One of the things that I quickly [illegible] in the first place, in real life tended to be  far too conservative, because you probably always had some information about  the style of the other side’s play, so to speak. He was a bit more predictable than  that assumed.  
- Q1: What would be an example of that?  
- Marshall: Well, that was our interest in the Russians, in the sense that if you looked  at them, understood their organizations, understood their history, you didn’t have  to assume that they were always going to do the most damaging, worst thing, or  that they were going to randomize and so on. Real competitions really weren’t  like that. 
- Q1: I take it you weren’t getting much substantial support in understanding what  type of opponent we were facing from the political scientists? Or it was inadequate, their characterization of what the enemy was up to.  
- Marshall: Yes, right.  
- Q1: Was that a general feeling within RAND?  
- Marshall: I think it was. I think people as a whole tended to be disappointed in what  it was the social scientists really could offer. And the social scientists, I think, on  the one hand, were cautious about what they—When they were asked direct  questions they felt they couldn’t answer, something like that. Anyway, they were  very cautious, and didn’t feel they had any way of, I suppose, getting better at doing better. Clearly, there were some differences among them, but they tended to  want to work on their own kinds of problems, in their own ways, and that’s one of  the reasons they initially stayed separate and stayed so long in Washington before  moving eventually, under a lot of pressure, to Santa Monica. The Social Science  and the Economics Departments were originally set up as a result of this meeting  that took place in New York, when RAND was going to become a new, separate  organization, not just a project at the Douglas Aircraft Company. And there was  a discussion about, “What issues do we want to really deal with? What kind of  expertise do we need? What kind of questions do we need to address?” And it was  out of that that there came the notion that there ought to be political scientists,  and economists, and so on.34 But then the political scientists were very loath to  get much involved in really helping. These people had a problem.  
- Q1: It’s interesting, because there was a genuine demand for their services.  
- Marshall: Yes, there was.  
- Q1: It wasn’t just icing on the cake. There was a need for this help—  
- Marshall: That’s right.  
- Q1: —and it wasn’t provided or it was inadequate.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q1: So they pretty much set their own research agenda—  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q1: —apart from the rest of you? How did they get away with that?  
- Marshall: I don’t know. I guess by arguing, pleading. I don’t know, I’m not sure  of the whole thing. They did some things. I think they were not of very great  quality. They started this effort looking at the Soviet military writings or some of  the doctrine. I think it was very inauspicious, given the time when they actually  started to do it, in the early ‘50s, because—and this is something that Loftus and  I pushed very strongly—there was a big, big difference between what they were  actually doing during that period and the doctrine. The overt doctrine tended to  belittle nuclear weapons and tended to be much in the mold of their World War II  operations, whereas if you saw what they were really doing, it was just very, very  different. Here was a country that was just recovering from staggering losses, damage, and  so on, but that started a very big nuclear program in the middle ‘40s. In some  ways, ‘45 through ‘50 is one of the most interesting periods with regard to the  development of the Soviet military.35 Big changes took place. Many things were  started that represented really big shifts, big allocations of resources, enormous  allocations of resources. There’s some reason to believe that something like 50  percent of all the concrete poured in the Soviet Union for a couple of years or so  in the middle and late ‘40s went into the nuclear program, at a time when the  overt doctrine tended to pooh-pooh the importance of nuclear weapons. But  obviously Stalin…  I think the real thing was that coming out of the war they saw that they were  quite far behind in a number of technologies, not only the atomic bomb, but the  Germans had done the V-2, their big jet aircraft, innovations in aircraft design,  radar, things the Soviets were very far behind on. Then also, against the Germans  they didn’t need any big air defense system. After World War II they started essentially the whole air defense effort. They also started a big missile program. They  took over things the Germans had underway, air defense missiles, rockets. They  took over all of those.  Also, Loftus and I used to note that they had had this close-support airplane, the  “Stormovik” or something, it was called, but then if you looked at the airplanes…  and then the doctrine seemed to glorify that and suggest that… but they never  built any, [Eds: never built] things for that close-support mission after the war was  over. They were all fighter-interceptors and some bombers and so on. So at the  level of the tactical aircraft, they didn’t build any specific aircraft for close support.  There were no new designs, no new buys of these close-support aircraft.  
- Q1: Now, at the time, what did you think accounted for that, the absence of  close-support aircraft?  
- Marshall: I guess we just took it that they were focusing on air defense and these  other things. They were just not oriented the way the doctrine said, that the real  decisions were taken with the other things in mind.  
- Q1: Was the failure of the political scientists to take into account what the Soviets  were actually doing, as opposed to what they were writing, due simply to their  lack of access to intelligence?  
- Marshall: I don’t think so. No, they had no inclination to do that. Loftus and I, in the  end, gave up. We kept telling them, “How do you explain this? How do you explain that?” They just kept churning away, looking at the Soviets’ written materials.  Now, in the end, I think doctrine is actually very interesting and is a very fruitful  source, but they just were in a period when it didn’t provide very much insight.  Later, there was this big change in the ‘50s to this potential doctrine of preemption and so on. And later in the ‘50s, of course, after Nikita Khrushchev came in as  premier, there was a big switch to open endorsement of nuclear weapons. In fact,  they went sort of too far in that direction and then they came back.

## Outline for 29 October 1993 Talk  
[Note: Italicized items were not discussed during the interview.]  
### Introduction  
1. Purpose  
    — Talk through aspects of ‘50s/‘60s  
    — Emphasis on AWM intellectual history  
    — Format  
        • Short talk  
        • Questions from small group  
2. Problem  
    — Right way of integrating/treating  
        • AWM intellectual history  
        • Contrasting RAND intellectual framework  
        • Interaction of analysis and real world  
### AWM Intellectual History (1950–69)  
1. Probably better to focus on this period  
    — ‘49/early ‘50 focus on mental health problem with Herb Goldhamer  
    — Dec ‘69 start of work for Kissinger  
    — Also Sep ‘53–Apr ‘54 teaching at University of Chicago—some focus on Monte  Carlo methods  
    — And Aug ‘63–Mar ‘65—Paris/NATO interlude  
2. Treatment  
    — Start in middle ~1960  
        • Then ask—how did I get there  
        • What happened after  
3. 1960—Themes of thinking  
    — Importance of macroeconomic constraints (especially in understanding the  Soviets—focus on military budget/resource constraints, costing effort. Existing Soviet economic studies worthless)  
    — Importance of looking at others (Soviets) within framework of:  
        • Organizations as actors (shaped by history, past patterns of behavior, adaptations to social, cultural aspects of society)  
        • Rational actor model not useful—Heymann study  — Possibility of useful forecasting  • Some aspects/past behavior patterns  
        • Hence, game theory max/min not good either—always know more of  others than this suggests  • Uncertainty must be reflected  −Others’ actions not fixed, evolve, but past choices constrain  
    — What people (analysts) believe may not be reality-based (reality vs. model  focus)  
        • NATO beliefs  
        • RAND political scientists’ view of allies’ actions (can’t afford bigger military  budgets?)  
4. Discussion of ‘50s, how this developed  
    — 1950/’51/’52 not too interesting  
        • Focus on measures of effectiveness—role of economists at RAND  
            −Value of history  
            −Herb Goldhamer  
        • Targeting—>focus on intelligence and later work, but not central to intellectual history, key in relation to Joe Loftus (learned a lot—especially  importance of ‘45–‘50 for Soviets)—failure of political scientists  
        • Strategic warning  
            −How to think about others  
            −Irrationality of U.S. analysts  
    Herman Kahn [notes in upper left margin of p. 3 of handwritten outline]  Reality focus (reinforce each other); Role of economists; Monte Carlo; What’s  wrong with RAND; Analysis; Models; Rationality; Treatment of uncertainty  
        • Important for intellectual ideas on:  
            −Long-term competition/lost later at RAND (until I revived in ‘69)—period  of thinking about U.S. strategy vis-a-vis Soviet Union  
        • Value of gaming/as evolved at RAND  
            −Not based on German war games  
            −Came from game theory/analysis of strategy as games—>(Merrill Flood)  idea of using game-playing skills of people to find solutions to games  that were mathematically intractable  
        • Counterforce/preventive war (preemption) insights into others  
    — Things really get started in summer of 1954/return to RAND—‘63  
        • Next Ten Years  
            −Last of long-term competition efforts/what are the big strategic moves,  what is the situation—prototype of some later work (faded at RAND—  why?)  
            −Use of games/SAW—criteria problem/AWM/Hirshleifer (Rational actor  model problem)  
        • Work with Loftus  
            −Importance of ‘45–’50 for Soviets  
            −We can do better on forecasts  
            −Impetus/RAND failures, intelligence not trying  
            −Controversies with political scientists (look at what doing, not just  writing—organizational behavior). Importance of history/trends  
            −Sovoy, leads to: AWM reading of Barnard, Simon & March/later Cyert &  March (most important); (Crozier—‘63 book); Central part of work until  leave for Paris, Aug ‘63  
        • Continued work with Herb Goldhamer  
            −Herb’s game  
            −‘58 collaboration on Framework paper/Nathan Leites—Value differences  U.S./Soviet/use of judgment in ranking/assigning utility values to vectors  (state)  
5. Post-Paris/Spring ‘65–‘69  
    — Return to organizational behavior focus/start project at RAND  
        • Meet March, Cyert, Crecine  
        • Neustadt, Allison, May/May Group, fall ‘65 (Big influence)  
        • Application to Soviets/military programs  
    Carnegie school—look at others; began line of analysis Harvard Business  School—>notion of strategies (very important)  
    [notes in middle left margin of p. 5 of handwritten outline]  
    — Schlesinger comes to RAND  
        • Summer of ‘62—friends  
        • Full-time summer ‘63  
        • After return (Paris) we both read Ardrey’s Territorial Imperative, began discussing ethology, nonrational aspects of behavior−Implications for psychological/political impact of military forces, etc.  (‘68–’69)  
    — Together (organizational behavior+ ethology)—>critique of standard deterrence theory  
        • Lead to insights on analysis of strengths/weaknesses—we/they  
        • 1966 paper on assessing strengths/military balances  
    — Wikner/NetTechnical Assessment in DoD  
        • RAND contract—became involved in ‘67/‘68 (?)—needs checking. Write  papers/memos/etc.  
    — Rowen as new president of RAND (late ‘67). Schlesinger and me as major  advisers—> creation of new post—Director of Strategic Studies (strategic  forces). Schlesinger appointed spring ‘68.  
        • Late ‘68 Schlesinger leaves for new administration (transition team)  
        • Early ‘69 AWM takes over  
            −Review of strategic program/meetings in spring/summer ‘69→ development of long-term competition ideas—return to early [‘50s]  
6. Contrasts with mainline RAND  
    — Counterforce is possible!  
    — Can do better than rational model  
    — Importance of not overestimating opponent  
        • Air defense case  
    — Organizations matter  
    — Resources matter  
    — Long-term competition theme in late ‘60s—shift of focus (real flash of insight  for me)  
7. Some comments of national level  
    — Special aspects of World War II generation  
        • Impact on ‘50s/Eisenhower Administration  
    — Fades in early ‘60s  
        • Cuba->‘63/’64 shift  
            −Big strategic errors begin  
            −Focus on stability/arms control vs. competing/bankrupting (Long-term  competition)  −Counter cost-imposing  
            −Limits on accuracy  
    — Kissinger strategic pessimism/settling for parity  
        • Contrast with Schlesinger  
        • No adjustment (query of Bill Hyland/Rodman)  
    — Long-term consequences of misestimating Soviet economy—deep sources  going back to ‘30s/‘40s—loss of belief in free markets—broader trends/ethos/  importance of


### 1950–1969

- Marshall: While I joined RAND in January of ‘48 [‘49], the real time to start this  discussion, I think, is really the summer of 1950.37 Because during the first year  I spent my time, first in Washington, working with Herbert Goldhamer on this  large project on mental disease, which was very interesting, but didn’t contribute  very much later.38 I mean its part in my intellectual history is not very interesting. I  picked up certain things, principally the critique that was emerging of U.S. thinking about how to target the limited number of nuclear weapons, and whether  you ought to immediately expend all of them or have some more deliberate,  politically motivated strategy for using things.  
- Q4: Be an interesting linkage, linking mental disease to knocking all the weapons  out.  Marshall: No, this was just side conversations.  Then there are also some other years that kind of drop out in this whole period.  One is when I went off to teach at the University of Chicago, September of ‘53  through about April of ‘54. And then there’s a period, August ‘63 through March  of ‘65, when I lived in Paris and was involved with this do-nothing organization  called NATO, which had no contributing, positive features intellectually as far as I  could tell.  
- Q3: What did you teach at Chicago?  
- Marshall: Mathematical statistics, the first graduate courses. Allen Wallis, who had  become a friend of mine, had gone off for some big study at that time that he  headed for the Ford Foundation, which was going to give a lot of money to universities, and the study was to decide where to give the money.  
- Q4: Was that the original purpose in you going?  
- Marshall: The original purpose? No, the original purpose was that I was going to  complete the work for a doctorate. Instead, he persuaded me to teach his courses.  And so I never finished that. Right.  Also, essentially ‘69 is a good year to end, because in January [December] of that  year, I first went to work for Henry Kissinger. And basically while I was at RAND  until January of ‘72, I really worked half time or more through that whole period  for Kissinger on the National Security Council staff. So really the period from summer of ‘50, in some sense, through November of ‘69 was a reasonable period, with  these other periods left out.  So look at 1960, then, as this intermediate point, as a way of getting at that. What  were some of the themes that characterize the way I was thinking about things?  One that came, I suppose, out of my training as an economist was this importance  of macroeconomic constraints, especially, as you’ll see later, in understanding the  Soviets. The importance of looking at the military budget, the resource constraints  as a whole, led to an effort by Joseph Loftus and I to… or a proposal really, which  then the Central Intelligence Agency actually adopted, I think, although maybe other people were thinking the same way, that you had to undertake this overall  costing of the Soviet military effort.39 Up until that time, the CIA had spent a lot  of time looking at the economy, but a lot of it was related to industry studies—if  you’re going to attack the Soviet Union, what do you want to know about its industrial structure and so on—and their general economic success. But the reason  you wanted to do the overall costing was that people, in looking at and trying to  make forecasts of Soviet programs, did them individually, without any sense of  any overall cost or resource constraints that they might have. So the idea was a  way of disciplining and integrating efforts to look at the Soviet military effort as a  whole. But there had been lots of things, which we will get into later, which made  that always seem very important to me.  The second thing, which by that time I’d gotten into a lot, was that if you’re looking at other countries, like the Soviets, the military in particular, you have to take  account of the fact that what you’re talking about are big, complicated organizations. You have got to move away from this notion of, “There is this thing called  ‘the Soviets,’ that have decided X or Y,” and realize that what you’re talking about  when you’re talking about Soviet military programs is the actions or the outcome  of decisions of big, complicated organizations.  Now at one level that seems obvious, but it wasn’t until I’d say the late ‘50s that I  myself had this insight into the blindingly obvious. Because almost all the discussion of these things tends to proceed in terms of, “‘The Soviets’ have decided, or  ‘the leaders’ have decided X, Y, and Z.” And then once you think about that, then it  leads you to, “How do these organizations come to be what they are? What is their  history? What is the actual organizational structure and their processes? What are  their past patterns of behavior? How have they had to adapt to social-cultural  aspects?”  Although it wasn’t until, I guess, the early ‘60s that Michel Crozier wrote his book  [The Bureaucratic Phenomenon] and I read it and was very impressed by it.40  Which gets you, again, beyond the organizational factors and into factors of  social-cultural importance, because, as his book points out, there just are these  systematic differences between French organizations, British organizations, American organizations, as to how they function, because organizations are very much  involved with this issue of the relationship of subordinates to superiors. These  individual cultures, right from the beginning, create those kinds of relationships  and predispose people to certain attitudes about those relationships and how  they ought to be structured and so on. Therefore the organizations, when they  come to deal with the raw material any particular culture has provided through  the nature of the culture, adapt to that, have to deal with the fact that if they want  this organization to run, they have to take account of the fact that it’s inhabited by  Germans or French or British, and so on. In any case, you just have to move away  from either this vague “The Russians decided” or “the Soviets decided” or this  more formal kind of “rational actor” model.  I guess one of the reasons this became dramatically clear to Loftus and I, who I’ll  get to a little later, is the experience both he and I had at RAND and throughout  the ‘50s, although he may have arrived when I was away at Chicago or maybe slightly before that.41 He had been in the Air Force intelligence organizations, the  Air Force had the chief responsibility then for following the Soviet nuclear programs, and he had headed that group and had had a lot of access to intelligence  materials. He and I became close friends because of some earlier involvement. I  was one of the few people at RAND who had been much involved in and more  directly in intelligence things. But at any rate, we knew a lot of things which other  people at RAND didn’t know.  There had been a study by two or three RAND people [H. Heymann, J. DeHaven,  R. Raymond, The Soviet Intercontinental Mission Through 1957].42 It came out  probably in ‘56 or maybe ‘57 [‘54]. It was an effort to say, “Where are all the Soviet  bomber bases that we don’t seem to know about, or at least the people at  RAND didn’t know about?” They said, “The Soviets are rational planners, where  would they put these bases?” They did this study which reached this very wrong  conclusion that all the big bomber bases were along the Trans-Siberian railroad,  but in Siberia, very far from all of the coastal areas, because they could be subject  to attack and so on. This was part of the whole pattern at RAND about why you  couldn’t do counterforce. It was not only that we didn’t know where these things  were, but, in addition, they were going to be in places that would be difficult to  get to and so on. Loftus and I knew that was a lot of cr…bunk. And so we used to  use arguments like, “Why is March Air Force Base where it is? Why don’t you think  their bases are where they have been? Don’t you remember that airplanes used  to have short legs? If you wanted to hit somebody, where would you put your air  force bases? And why would they move them? Or why would they move them  and we haven’t?” And all of that was totally unavailing.  Anyway, things like that disabuse you of the notion that these actions and all of  these things are the result of highly rational behavior and so on. So there’s that.  It’s very important to get into things like that.  But all of this then leads to the notion that you actually can do some useful  forecasting. It’s not entirely hopeless to forecast some aspects of an opponent’s  behavior. Also, it tells you that, of course, you don’t want to use the rational model  as the basis of the forecast.  And also one of the things at RAND which this leads you away from… What was  very important intellectually at RAND in the early days was this notion that game  theory was going to be a very important tool. Not just technically, that you could  actually solve, make it a game that you could— but as a way of thinking. And in  the game theory ethos of that time, the minimax strategies were the thing that  you ought to follow in the face of uncertainty. Again, by ‘60, or even much earlier,  I was very convinced that you could do a lot better than that. That you did know  some things about past behavior, and you could predict in some ways the kind of  probability distribution of the behaviors, much more than the gametheory view  suggested.  And the other aspect is that, of course, nonetheless the future is uncertain and  uncertainty has to be reflected, not artificially removed, as was true in so many  forecasts, where people make their best estimate and then decide that they’re  going to plan against that. The other thing, or maybe main perspective I had, was that what people, analysts  believe may not be reality-based, and I’ve already gone into one example, this  study of Soviet bomber bases that I mentioned.  Another thing that by the mid-’50s I certainly had come to believe was that most  of the way in which NATO was discussed and thought about was wrong in some  essential ways. There is this tendency, which may have been politically appropriate in dealing with the people who we wanted to go along with us, to treat the  NATO alliance as a real alliance, rather than the situation of a major power and a  bunch of protectorates, which, in my view, it was, it remained.  The first reason I came to feel that way was that I noticed—and let’s get back to  some of these resource issues—that some of the RAND political scientists would  go to Europe and come back and have all of these explanations, beginning in  the middle ‘50s, about why the 1952 Lisbon force goals were not being met. The  political scientists claimed the reason why things the European allies had signed  up to in the early ‘50s were not happening was because they couldn’t afford that.  I pointed out to them, first, that the European allies had already reached or surpassed their prewar per capita gross national product levels of output. They were  all living better than they had in the ‘30s. How was it that they could make these  big efforts and that there might… We certainly needed an explanation about why  they weren’t doing what they should have been doing, but it had nothing to do  with the fact that they were too poor. Yet people kept using that explanation.  So I kept trying to tell the political scientists it was not a problem of economics,  it was something that they should be dealing with and explaining. The only  person who offered real insight about it, as far as I was concerned, was Nathan  Leites, who said, “If you look at them, their belief, the Europeans’ belief structure,  is that there are giants, midgets, and pygmies. And that they are midgets, and  they are simply not up to certain things.” They’re psychologically unable to act as  the giants do. And then there are, of course, the… Well, no, I guess it’s the other  order; it’s the giants, the pygmies, and the midgets. And then there are these  midgets around that are still below them. And unless you see something like that,  or adopt that view, which is, of course, very undiplomatic, you mislead yourself  about what’s probably really going on in these people all through until the very  end, and probably to some extent even now they are acting in ways that fit much  better the notion that they saw us as protecting them, rather than their being  part of an alliance where they’re all really going to fight together and going to  have some real equal relationship.  
- Q2: Do you think the Soviet Union was a “giant” in the ‘50s?  
- Marshall: Well, it was and it wasn’t. They certainly had a navy… Again, we’ll get back  to that. I think that’s one of the other problems with the misperception of the Soviets throughout this whole thing. But they certainly had a big military program.  
- Q2: Did Nathan Leites think that the Europeans saw the Soviets as a “giant?”  
- Marshall: Yes, oh yes.  
- Q2: So there’s one “giant” protecting them from another “giant.”
- Marshall: That’s right.  OK, so let’s go back more to looking in a bit more detail at the ‘50s. Again, in the  period ‘50, ‘51, ‘52, through the summer of ‘53 really, it is not so interesting, I think.  There were a lot of things that went on, but from this point of view of intellectual history not all of them were that interesting. For myself initially, after I joined  the Economics Department at RAND, I was focused a lot on these measures of  effectiveness—the “criteria problem”—which was seen as one of the major roles  of the economists.43 Even there, there were certain things that came out, I think,  like the value of history in thinking about some of those issues and also, through  my association with Herb Goldhamer, which continued, his insights about human  behavior and how various things had to be taken into account.44 So anyway, I  worked some on that.  I worked a lot on the problem of the appropriate targets to be destroyed in the  Soviet Union, how to use efficiently the small number of weapons that we had.45  But that led to my getting very much involved in intelligence matters. Which  led to this natural selection by Loftus of me as a close associate when he joined  RAND. It was through him that I learned, more than I had by that time, about the  Soviets and various intelligence problems. We also got into a lot of battles with,  again, the political scientists at RAND, who had this focus on the Soviet military  doctrine. Now I certainly think the doctrine is very important, but they absolutely  refused, as far as we could tell, to look at what the Soviets actually did. So they focused on their writings, which was very unfortunate… [gap due to tape change]  …1945 to, say, the middle ‘50s, when they were writing, was the period where  there probably was the biggest discrepancy between the written doctrine and  what they were really doing. In fact, in retrospect, both Loftus and I felt that the  period ‘45 to ‘50 was absolutely central in understanding the Soviets, because  it was in the aftermath of the war that they undertook these massive efforts to  catch up with the West and with us in military technology.46 They pushed their  nuclear program and, in fact, at the time when the doctrine was pooh-poohing  nuclear weapons, they undertook this program in which they spent a very big  proportion of their GNP. In fact, Loftus told me, based on some of the information he had, that something like 50 percent of all concrete poured in the Soviet  Union for several years in the late ‘40s went into the nuclear program. This was at  a time when they were rebuilding the country. And if you look at our own nuclear  program, there were times when we had the nuclear program absorb an enormous fraction of some certain kind of things, like special stainless steel. There was  a point in U.S. history where something like 25 or 50 percent of the stainless steel  went into the nuclear program.  
- Q4: The conclusions that you and Loftus reached, were they largely driven by the  fact that you and he had access to information which the others did not, and so  you had this chance to see this graphic contrast?  
- Marshall: Yes, a lot of it was. Because access to these intelligence materials, like  communications intelligence and so on, which at that time was very rich and  detailed about many things, was very closely held. Loftus and I and maybe two or  three other guys at RAND were the only people who had access to that. Going back to this ‘45–’50 period, it was not only the nuclear program, but they,  as we, grabbed a bunch of German scientists in aviation technology—design  was where the Germans were far ahead and put out this swept-wing jet fighter  —and from the ballistic missile programs. They grabbed not only the scientists,  but a bunch of the missiles themselves and started shooting them at Kapustin  Yar shortly after the war. They took over the people who had been—the Germans  had underway two surface-to-air missiles for air defense purposes. I forget the  names of them… One was “Schmetterling”—“butterfly.” The other was…  
- Q3: “Wasserfall.”  
- Marshall: “Wasserfall,” yes, right. The Russians started out, but didn’t fully create a  new organization, had everything but it, of a big air defense organization. During  World War II, they didn’t have…they had a bunch of antiaircraft guns and so on,  but they didn’t have a big set of radars and so on. And they were very far behind  in radar.  So you had the Russians starting a big missile program, their nuclear program,  creating this air defense structure and going into that in a big way in response to  our obvious strategic bombing competence. 1945–1950 was a big period of innovation, of setting the pattern for where they were going. It was very important.  Also, they started to build long-range bombers. Prior to World War II, they had  some bomber enthusiasts. Most of the bombers were knocked out early in the  war and never… Basically, their bombers did nothing during the war. They probably weren’t even reconstituted. I don’t think they had any long-range bombing  capabilities at all. After the war, they went into the long-range bomber business.  So if you wanted to understand where they were going, to hell with the reading  of this doctrine about, “Close-air support is the big mission for the air forces” and  so on. I used to point out to the RAND political scientists that the Soviets had  produced no close-support aircraft, ever; I mean specialized ones. I emphasized  that they had done bombers, they had air defense fighters, and so on, and they  had some medium-range bombing things, but they didn’t have these “Stormovik”-type or any specialized close-support aircraft. Right.47  Let me say, just as an aside, these particular years—’50, ‘51, ‘52, ‘53—were the  years when Herman Kahn and I were very close friends. We essentially spent every  night, every weekend together, unless one of us was away on a trip or doing  something. He and I reinforced, I guess, our notions that there were two kinds  of people in the world: people who focused on reality and wanted to know how  the world really functioned, and those who focused on their models or some  hypotheses and barely looked at the world, or occasionally looked at the world.  And we talked a lot about why it was the economists had been so successful at  RAND and gradually took over much of the stuff. We talked a lot about the Monte  Carlo methods and so on. We also discussed what was wrong with the RAND-type  of analysis, the emphasis on the models, which we have already talked about,  the emphasis on rationality in the narrow sense, how uncertainty was treated,  and so on. Which finally led Herman astray, in my view, in the sense that in the  middle ‘50s, he gave a talk that was so sensationally successful that it turned him into a kind of super briefer, almost media personality, instead of continuing to  work hard on other things.48 But he was an immensely bright guy and just a really  wonderful person.49  
- Q4: Either in this portion of your speech, or your book, or in a previous one, are you  going to deal in some more detail with RAND’s intellectual atmosphere at this  point in time? Why it recruited the kind of people it did? What that meant for its  output? To what degree that was part of the mainstream of intellectual thinking  at this point? To what extent it led it or trailed it in the country?  
- Marshall: I talked, I guess, some about that in the first thing. I’m not sure of all the  criteria, but RAND, I know from my own personal case, initially treated its people  fantastically and was very attractive. I know the offer that I got was 50 percent  bigger than any other offer I had and, again, I only had one or two others. So it  bid high for the people it wanted. It had negotiated what today would seem an  outlandishly generous operation. People were to fly first class. Secondly, the notion was that people like this needed to take vacations, so they were paid double  when they took a vacation day. From the beginning, they got 30 days of vacation  a year or something like that. And there was a support structure in which the  people actually thought that they were to help the professional staff. It was the  most terrific organization to be involved in. And then the people, the collection of  people were extraordinary in lots of ways…  
- Q6: And had essentially total freedom to choose what you did.  
- Marshall: Yes, right. You picked your own problems to a large extent. There was a  group of people who shaped the thing, but if you had a good idea of something  you wanted to work on, you could propose it and chances were that, if this was at  all reasonable, you’d be allowed to do it.  
- Q4: In your view is that, was that the right thing to do?  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q4: And does that say something about how to do that sort of thing in the future?  
- Marshall: Absolutely. There’s that, plus the fact, which I would get to later… I think  the other thing that I felt I learned and took away from it came out of the program they had of having people in during the summer to work on various sorts  of things. RAND, at that time, was, I think, very ahead in a lot of these areas, and  therefore the people coming through were the likes of John von Neumann and  all these guys. The whole notion, particularly of the summer thing, was, we have  these problems; the objective is to assemble the best people in the country, not  just the best people within RAND. You see, the problem with most organizations  is that when they have problems to work on, their focus is on, “How can we do  the best we can with the people in our organization?” But the attitude at RAND  was really one that I think very much carried over from World War II. I think there  is a very big impact—we’ll be getting into it a little later—of World War II, when  people were really serious: we had a problem, we tried get the very best people  to work on it [indistinct]. So I have come away, really for the rest of my life, with  the belief that what should happen is, if you have a problem, you get the very  best people to work on it, and it doesn’t matter whether they’re in your organization or not. The thing to do is, if you have a problem, you get the best people you  possible can to work on it.  
- Q3: But to link this back to the point where you left off, despite the fact that you  have this very favorable structure, and all these best people, you still have these  intellectual pathologies.  
- Marshall: Yes, exactly. Absolutely.  
- Q3: So I was curious if you could expand on the discussions you had with Herman as  to what went wrong, what happened at RAND that the economists of a particular  type—  
- Q6: If I might interject just a short point in talking about game theory, which kind  of answers your question. They had guys like Thomas Schelling and like Martin  Shubik, who were very articulate, very forceful, believed in their own worldviews,  argued them very strongly in public. And it’s hard to overturn people like that. So  you had these guys who were “pathologies” arguing very strongly.  
- Q3: “Viruses,” “viruses.” But the system… In other words, was the system with regard  to these “viruses” particularly weak because it was predisposed to look at the  world in this way? I mean why were these people… Just force of personality? I  mean Tom Schelling is hardly [indistinct].  
- Marshall: Yeah, right. Well, look, to answer your thing more directly: First, I’ll make  a general point. There is the tendency—and it’s, in my view, what has largely  happened to economics and, to some extent, statistics, which are the two fields  I know the best—for these fields to tum inwardly upon their own models and so  on, and toward mathematics and so on, and just away from reality. There seems to  be some strong tendency within various fields for that sort of thing to happen.  As to why the economists were so successful, and therefore unduly narrowed  the RAND approach to the problems, it was to some extent the abdication by the  political scientists, and possibly to some extent it may have been that the wrong  kind of political and behavioral science people were there. The so-called “Social  Science” Department was primarily—I mean that’s what its title was, but it really  was political scientists, particularly heavily people who had been involved during  the war in the propaganda and information agencies. Now Goldhamer was a sociologist, but there weren’t anthropologists. Some of those were brought in, but  it was part of trying to understand the Russians, much as the attempt had been  made to use anthropologists to understand the Japanese during the war. It may  have been that the right kind of people just didn’t exist in the social science side  of things, I don’t know. In any case, the social scientists stayed in Washington; they  preferred to be in Washington rather than Santa Monica. They had two or three  people in Santa Monica. They weren’t involved in the studies, the main studies.  They only later migrated out there and never integrated very well with the rest  of the organization. So this whole area of “criteria”—how you should think about  what it is you’re trying to do, how to measure it and so on—ended up in the  hands of the economists.  It also was true early on that the RAND economists gained a lot of ascendancy  because the engineers, who had been doing this on their own, were such idiots. Once you looked at them [the criteria defined by the engineers] logically, they  were demolished. The engineers just were no competition for the economists.  I think it’s a deeper question about why it was these theories of deterrence and  so on ended up the way they were, so heavily focused on essentially assuming  rationality of calculations. Now there, people like Schelling may have been very  important, but that was true to a large extent of Albert Wohlstetter and all these  other people who were very much of the…  
- Q7: Yeah, you haven’t mentioned Wohlstetter and Bernard Brodie and William  Kaufmann, which I think are people associated with sort of the “golden age” of  RAND.  
- Marshall: Yeah. Kaufmann was more involved. Brodie was off writing a book  [Strategy in the Missile Age] and never got so much involved.50 Actually, the view  you mention is looking at it from the outside. They wrote these things that got  published in journals, but the real guts of what was happening was in classified  reports by people who did write in those areas. So I think people on the outside  have a very, very distorted view about that.  Now, Albert was very important because of the inventions he made or approaches  he had to how you ought to do studies. I think the most important one I mentioned in that festschrift thing [On Not Confusing Ourselves].51 You see, again, the  engineers when they started, were mathematicians who did the early big RAND  system studies and tried to lay out, “Well, there are these 24 alternative designs  of airplanes,” or whatever it is, “and then here are these models of campaigns, and  we try each one of them, we run through these calculations, and the one that  does best, given all these criteria, is the one we pick.” The problem early on was  one wacko criterion in many cases that was not logically very good. But they had  constrained themselves by creating these 24 cases and then doing that and then  that’s the end of the study.  Albert adopted a very different strategy, which was an incremental one. You have  what people think they are already going to do, and then you design some alternatives, and you run it through a whole bunch of different calculations, and as  you’re going through it you begin to learn how to design new, better alternatives.  And by sort of successive approximations you get better and better combinations  of characteristics of a program that might be significantly better than the official  listing of the initial program of these organizations, and that’s what in the end you  propose. You’re not constrained by what you imagine or guess at the beginning  as to what combinations of things are good, and you can also try a wider range of  contingencies and assumptions and test for which alternative is the best. And he  was very cautious in looking for an alternative that had dominance over the official,  approved program. It’s a much better strategy for doing studies. Also you don’t  make up your mind initially about what the criteria are. You start with some and  add others as you think of different aspects or ways of measuring what you want.  Now, that strategy has a separate difficulty in the end, in that one of the failures, I  think, on Albert’s part was not to take account of the fact that what you’re trying  to influence are organizations. And there was the danger that in some cases you  would be unrealistic about the advantages your proposal would have, because as it would really be implemented it wasn’t going to have those savings. For example, one of the things that he was much involved in was various kinds of hardening, the protection of systems. You could say, “Alright, people on submarines live  in so many cubic feet, why can’t we have submarine levels of austerity, so to speak  in protective structures on land?” So some of the things would come out being  more austere and minimalist than, in fact, you could ever expect the organization  [indistinct] adopted it was going to do these things, wouldn’t do it to those standards. So the advantages you claimed realistically weren’t going to occur.  If you were going to try to persuade an organization to do something very different, you had to have a whole implementation strategy that went along with the  proposed approach; you couldn’t stop with just the proposal, “Do X.” You needed  a whole strategy for making something like “X” actually happen. Later on—that’s  more a matter of the ‘60s—the verbiage was coined that there’s a “missing chapter” in almost all the RAND studies, which is the implementation strategy, given  that what you’re trying to influence are these organizations.52  OK, the other thing that I thought was very important about RAND, particularly in  the first few years, and I think it’s probably true of the country as a whole, was these  initial notions, which I came back to in ‘69, of this long-term competition. That is,  that the way you really need to look at our situation, had to look at our situation,  was that we were in this extended competition with the Soviets, and that we had  certain strengths of our economic and technological capabilities and so on, and  that we needed a strategy and policy for engaging in that competition. I think an  interesting question is why that thinking kind of disappeared after the mid-‘50s,  and I don’t know the answer to that. But it just kind of disappeared from RAND  thinking. It was only later that I revived it in ‘69. But it was very prominent then, I  mean people thinking in a more strategic vein. And it had an impact on that piece  that was written called The Next Ten Years, written in ‘54, which was an attempt directed inwardly at RAND to say, this is what the situation is, this is the longer-term  picture, these are the problems that people ought to be working on.53  
- Q2: Was that your piece? You did this piece?  
- Marshall: Right after I returned from Chicago, I was asked to join a group that Charles  Hitch and John Williams, I guess, were the chief people on, but it was Hitch, Williams, Brodie, and myself, Alex Mood, James Digby, I guess, and it was called the  “Strategic Objectives Committee.”54 I’m not sure what triggered it getting started.55  I think the idea was around and I came back and I was asked to join it. [gap for  tape change] …strategic level and to provide a context within which the thinking  about what specific projects people at RAND ought to work on could proceed.  Partly, it was triggered, I think, by an insider perspective that I guess had come  to fruition just before I left to go out to teach at Chicago. See, when I first went to  RAND, and I think it was not specific to RAND, the whole notion was, if there’s a  war, it’s going to be more or less like World War II, in the sense that the Russians invade Europe; we hold, hopefully, at the Pyrenees; …we cripple their economy by  strategic attack in the first few weeks of the war; and then it’s a mobilization race  between ourselves and them. We win that and we push them back and retake  Europe and we do in the Soviet Union and so on. That was the image of the war.56 Two things happened. One, thermonuclear weapons appeared and the stockpiles  were growing, and then the notion was that we’ve got to shift. You’re going to  essentially have to fight with what you’ve got, because they’re going to hit us and  we’re both going to be crippled. So the only things that count, that largely are  going to count, are what you have to begin with.57  
- Q2: But the shift came after this ‘54 publication?  
- Marshall: No, came before.  
- Q2: So it was before our thermonuclear weapons.  
- Marshall: Well, theirs too. Our first big test is in ‘52 and they have a test in ‘53. So the  shift was already taking place. I went away to Chicago and then I came back. Partly the stimulus for this thing probably was, “Well, people haven’t adjusted, even  at RAND, to this; we’ve got to really reformulate and say how we ought to look at  this whole world that we’re going to have to face.”  
- Q4: At this point, in this period of RAND’s existence, given your comments about the  contrast between the realities and the perceptions, were those of you who—the  few of you that had insights like even Loftus, into the best we could figure out  about the Soviets, did you have very different views about the risks of war than  the people who did not have those insights? Or did you all differ in your opinions  on the risk of war, or were you all basically in agreement, even if your perceptions  were wrong in historical retrospect?  
- Marshall: I don’t know. I’m not sure enough about the different perceptions of the  risks of war. I did run two samples of people at RAND, but it was much later. One  was done in the very late ‘50s, I think [‘59].58 I put out a questionnaire and had  people fill it in to give their own estimates, but with several weighted answer  questions so you could check what their estimates should have been. At least in  the late ‘50s, the RAND average view was that there still was a very high risk of  war. People were making estimates of the probability of war within the decade.  The answers were, as I remember, just under 20 percent. But there was a big  spread. There were some political scientists—maybe it was one of their good  points—who tended to be on the low side. But then there was a big shift in the  ‘61, ‘62 period, especially after the Cuban missile crisis.  
- Q2: Wasn’t that shift after Sputnik and the Gaither Committee and all that?  
- Marshall: No, I don’t think that had a lot of effect. I think the height of concern  about war really was probably earlier, in the mid-‘50s.  
- Q2: So nobody got sucked into the “missile gap” argument at RAND?  
- Marshall: No, that’s not right. I think most people did. Again, there were a few of us,  like Loftus and I, who had better connections in the intelligence world and really  had a different view of that.  
- Q7: Wasn’t it the Air Force intelligence community that was concluding that there  was a “missile gap”, and there were other elements in the intelligence community,  like CIA, that were much more skeptical?  
- Marshall: It’s a complicated picture. The Air Force had the very high estimates. I forget the year, but, like, they were estimating the number of Soviet missiles at 500, or  the Soviets were going to have 500 missiles. The Army and the Navy essentially  said they had one or two or none. The CIA, in its official position, came out kind of  cutting the difference. If you talked to the CIA analysts, they were with the Army  and the Navy. But officially, as an organization, it didn’t take that view.59  
- Q7: When you were looking at your scenarios and strategic options, “this is how the  war might go,” there was, I believe, at least until 1954, some serious discussions in  senior circles, that is up to the point in Project Solarium, of preventive war—  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q7: —against the Soviet Union—  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q7: —and the so-called strategy of “massive retaliation” in the eyes of the Air Force  was really massive preemption. To me, that would have had a major bearing  and effect on your judgments about how war would have played out. Was that  factored in? I think that would be interesting.  
- Marshall: I think, in the first place, there were several people at RAND, and including  some of the visitors like von Neumann, who were very much pushing the notion  of preemptive war.60 In fact, there are some interesting documents, one by this  man John Williams, called Stalking the Tiger [Hunting the Tiger (And Other Aspects  of the Active Life)]. But on the whole, the RAND people were very much against  it.61 For reasons that I mentioned earlier, there were a bunch of people that were  absolutely persuaded that we didn’t know where the hell the targets were, so  you couldn’t do it. Then there were a whole bunch of others who, I think, felt for  whatever reason, whether political or emotional, that it just was not right to even  consider it, and so multiplied arguments, like, you couldn’t do it. Loftus and I felt  you probably could do it. In fact, later, around ‘59 or ‘60, we had sort of convinced  Kaufmann that the option was feasible. In fact, he was one of the people who did  become kind of converted to our views, and he undertook this study of counterforce.62 I think, until really the early ‘60s, that probably the U.S. had a real option.  But it didn’t, for a variety of reasons, get much consideration at RAND. The Kaufmann  thing happened very late, and was not—During most of the period, people sort of  either, as I say, had this view that it was just impossible, we didn’t know enough…  
- Q7: Another interesting thing, I think especially in terms of what we’re seeing now,  if memory serves, didn’t Schelling write, at least in the public literature, a paper  during the early ‘50s in which he reported a very high probability that you would  see large-scale proliferation over, say, the next 15 years? Did that ever come into  play at RAND in terms of your thinking?  
- Marshall: People thought some about proliferation, but I think it wasn’t anything  like that early. I suppose very early people thought it was going to happen fairly  quickly, but I don’t remember a lot of attention paid to that.  
- Q4: I sort of took you off the trail during this last section. You had just said something about reaching the conclusion that the Russians had a number of thermonuclear weapons, and you started building towards this image of how the war might have evolved, changed dramatically. Is that sort of, was that a shift in  thinking at RAND that was sort of universal and sort of quickly adopted, or was  it a struggle for people to come to the notion or even to think about the war in  very…  
- Marshall: I think the answer is yes and no. I think most people refer to that…  Although, going back to the reasons for this Strategic Objectives Committee, my  conjecture is that it says something about [indistinct] that the Strategic Objectives  Committee was motivated by the fact that some people felt that the organization  as a whole wasn’t really adjusting, adapting focus.  OK, let me pick up again. One other thing that came out of the ‘50s is this matter  of the value of gaming or gaming as a tool. In an interesting way, it’s not based  on any look at the military history of war-gaming or the value that the Germans  placed on it and so on. But it really, in an odd way, I think, at RAND came from this  game-theory effort that had such an emphasis in the early ‘50s. Because it quickly  became apparent that, except for the simplest games, you just couldn’t analytically do very much with…to analyze games.  There was a man named Merrill Flood, who proposed that, “Human beings have  great skills at playing games. If they play them frequently enough, they do devise  good strategies. If what we’re looking for are good strategies, why don’t we just  formulate games and play them, and make use of these skills that people have?”  And so that was done, with progressively more and more complicated games.  By this period around ‘54, there was a game that had been put together by this  fellow Alex Mood, who was a statistician, and possibly some other people. The  game I think was called “SAW,” “Strategic Air War” game or something like that.63 It  was used as part of this Strategic Objectives effort to look at large-scale nuclear  exchanges and so on.64 I remember that one of the things that happened, one of  the few times I remember anything like this, was Hitch corning to me just prior to  one of the meetings of the Strategic Objectives Committee to make sure I was going to vote right when this issue of what role in the final report should be claimed  by the results of these games. Because, again, they were kind of crazy. The criteria  were mis-specified initially, and a man named Jack Hirshleifer and I developed a  more complex measure of worth of the outcome. Initially, these mathematicians  specified the way you measure the outcome of the game was where the front  line was in the middle of Europe—where what was happening in the war was  both the U.S. and the Soviet Union were being destroyed. So the early plays didn’t  make a lot of sense. You had people trading half of the U.S. GNP for a few miles of  movement in the front line. So at any rate…  
- Q2: What was your better measure of effectiveness?  
- Marshall: We got the U.S. GNP and other things in the score and gave it a big  weight and… Right. Look, my life seems to me…that it’s kind of doing the obvious. Seems to be something that is important. Because it’s just amazing what  people do. No reasonable person is going to actually do this, but you have these  people who have this game, and they decide this fairly simple criteria and away  they go. 
- Q4: Are you at some point in this program going to devote some time and energy  to this issue about very bright people coming up with new ways to look at problems? And what happens when you get off on this pathological…  
- Marshall: I don’t know. But I think that one of the reasons this gaming thing took off  at RAND, and later there were some interesting games—Herb Goldhamer ran one  of the first of these political-military games I know about…65  Another item I had down here was counterforce, which we have already discussed. And the preemption business, which was discussed a lot at RAND.  Although the thing that was striking to me—let me say one more point about  it—was, for a place like RAND, how much the positions people took were determined on emotion. Because most of the resistance to it was just that it was seen  as… I don’t know whether it was immoral or this and that… Yet it seemed to me  that the logic, if you’re just going to talk about strategy in a very cold-blooded  way, not that that’s necessarily the final answer, but the logic of the people who  favored some kind of preemption was just enormous…given the views other  people had. If you have some big technical advantage, and you can deprive the  other guy of it, and you think it’s central to the whole situation in the world, you  have to have more than, “We’ve never done it before” as an argument. Anyway…  
- Q2: What do you attribute that to?  
- Marshall: …it was striking how logically weak the oppositions were. Most people  were against it, but didn’t have really well thought-out strategic reasons for not  doing it.  
- Q2: We used them in Japan, so why is that—Is it because we used them in Japan  that…  Marshall: No…I don’t know.  
- Q4: To what extent, given your experience subsequently, do you think that really  mirrored also the way administrations think?  
- Marshall: Clearly, people have been very reluctant to use these things. There’s no  doubt about that. But…  
- Q7: Not just restricted to nuclear weapons. The same thing is true…  
- Marshall: The other thing I suppose is interesting about that, although I think it  sets in later in the ‘60s, when the main problem was this sense that, in the end,  the Russians were going to win. That certainly was like Henry Kissinger’s view, to  some extent. There wasn’t perhaps as much of that in the ‘50s, but if you really  took a long-term perspective, you might have even redoubled the arguments  for preemption. But it was striking how poor the arguments against preemption  were. Bernard Brodie wrote a paper on the subject, and I guess one ought to go  back and reread that, but most of the argument against preemption seemed to  me very, very weak.  OK. We’ve already covered some of this. Let me go back to the work with Loftus,  which really is the central matter, I think, for much of this period. I told you about  how he comes to RAND probably around ‘53, and when I had gotten back after  the six months or so teaching at Chicago. I covered the fact that we early on had come to agreement that ‘45 to ‘50 is very important for an understanding of the  Soviets. We were also convinced, as I mentioned, early on that we could do better  than the RAND people were doing on forecasting.  See, one of the things that was going on at RAND at that time was that the intelligence community did not make longer-term estimates themselves. There were  a few things, but they were very limited. The RAND people who were looking at  the future, designing programs for the future, therefore were put in a position of  making up their own forecasts. Loftus and I looked at the things that they were  producing and thought that they were just awful, either because they had this  failure of this rationality model that we mentioned earlier… You had the political  scientists, who by that time were, as I said, focused on reading what the Soviets  were writing and not noticing what they were doing, and they were not a basis  for anything. But then you had people probably over-inventive on the side of the  Soviets. An example of which was—I think one of the things that, at least at RAND,  very much set back analyses in the air defense area—And something you have  to remember is that in the ‘50s, the U.S. had a very vigorous program to build up  its air defenses. In fact, I think that by the end of the ‘50s, we were spending more  on air defenses than we were on the strategic forces.66 But as the RAND people  got into this in the middle ‘50s or so… And by the way, they did for a while have  a very interesting behavioral scientist, a psychologist named John Kennedy, who  developed some very good simulation stuff, which then spun off into that…  
- Q2: SDC?  
- Marshall: …SDC [System Development Corporation], which did some very interesting things.67  But the people, in doing their analyses, were super-inventive on the part of the  Russians. I mean, at the radar perimeter, they had the Russians’ bombers coming  in with thousands of decoys and cruise missiles. In fact, cruise missiles initially  were largely invented as bomber decoys. That’s the way our thinking was. It was  only in probably the early ‘60s that people like Al Latter and company said, “Why  don’t we put bombs on these things?” which was a heresy in the eyes of the Air  Force. Anyway, they made the problem so hard that you just couldn’t defend  the country. You always kept getting the answer that it was nearly impossible. It  wasn’t clear that that was really ever true.68  Anyway, Loftus and I didn’t think much of what they were doing, so we undertook  our own project, probably after another thing I worked on a lot, but which was  not that intellectually important—work on strategic warning. 69 We started this  project called “Sovoy,” in which we offered to start making projections for the rest  of RAND. 70  
- Q4: Of the Soviets?  
- Marshall: On the Soviets.  
- Q2: Using classified information?  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q2: I mean using everything you had.
- Marshall: Yes, right. In fact, we had created a special arrangement with the intelligence people at the analytic level to give us much more material than they  otherwise would, because of our own connections with these guys, especially  Loftus’s. Then we got to this problem of, “How are we going to do this?” Then you  get to the things that I was mentioning earlier. Loftus and I already believed that  you need to know all about the history of these organizations and where they  come from. It’s an important fact, for example, that the Soviet missile people [the  Strategic Rocket Forces], when they were formed, took over one of the existing  academies—What do you think it was? It was the artillery academy. So you’ve got  to know about these guys, where they’re corning from and so on. And then I have  this, as I said, blindingly obvious insight of, “They’re organizations. That’s what  we’re trying to predict the behavior of.” Then you get into, “What the hell do we  know about organizations?”  So I start to read—this all starts about the spring of ‘57, probably, or ‘56 sometime—Chester Barnard, Herbert Simon [Administrative Behavior], Simon and  James March [Organizations]. Later, when it comes out, Richard Cyert and March  [Behavioral Theory of the Firm], which was probably the most influential book for  me. And then later, when Crozier comes out in ‘63 with his book, I read that.71  
- Q3: The Bureaucratic Phenomenon.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right. And this really was the central part of the stuff I worked on, except for when I went away to the Gaither Committee and so on. But until I left for  Paris, my work was on how do we do a better job of understanding the Soviets,  predicting them, thinking about them [indistinct], with this matter of, “We’ve got  to understand the allocation of resources, what their constraints are, what the  long-term costs are of the level of effort they put into the military,” and so on.  That reminds me of another thing I did around the late ‘50s. I did a lot of work on  the accuracy of our cost estimates of our own programs at various stages. You find  out the early estimates were pretty lousy.72  One other thing is this collaboration with Herb about deterrence and war-fighting,  which looked at the contrasting utility functions of ourselves and the Russians at  various stages of the exchanges that may go on.73  So then I go away to Paris. Pleasant living, no intellectual content, and learn more  about how abysmal organizations can be, how whole organizations can exist and  do practically nothing with lots of people paid a lot of money.  
- Q3: Were you sent there or…?  
- Marshall: Yes. What happened was Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara came  to an agreement with Dirk Stikker, who was then the Secretary General of NATO.  It was in ‘65 that there was going to be a five-year review process of the programs  within NATO, or there was then. McNamara persuaded Stikker that, “Look, this  thing is corning up in ‘65. What we should do is have some studies done so that  when we come to this review, we have some basis for deciding what’s good,  what’s bad.”  
- Q4: Revolutionary concept. 
- Marshall: So he approached RAND to put together a team of people to go over.  It was headed by a guy from RAND who was then the head of the Economics  Department, Burt Klein, and included me, Fred Hoffman, and Oleg Hoeffding, and  Peter Szanton, who was in the government at the time, came and that was it. We  were to do these collaborative studies with the other countries.74 I worked with  a succession of French colonels who, for a variety of reasons, were the head of  the thing. The study that I did looked at the actual stockpiles of ammunition and  other things, like tanks, that were held as replacements for attrition or for expenditure in war. There was a set of standards that people were supposed to have, so  many days of supply and so on and so forth. This was an across-theboard study of,  “What did people actually have?” Right.  
- Q3: I was just wondering if you volunteered for this or were…  
- Marshall: No. I was asked because by that time I had done some studies on NATO  problems.  When I returned in the spring of ‘65, the thing I then proposed was that I organize  a program of study at RAND on organizational behavior and how our knowledge  of that could be used in a wide variety of things, including this business of understanding the Russians.75 I was allowed to do that, to use not only my own time,  but to get three or four other people to work with me. Because of that, I first met  Jim March of Carnegie-Mellon University, and from him got leads to some students who might be recruited. Pat Crecine came for a year because of that. I went  to Harvard and talked with Dick Neustadt. I was told I ought to do that because  of some of the stuff he was doing. Out of that came the creation of the so-called  “May Group” chaired by Professor Ernest May, which began to meet probably  in the fall of ‘65, to talk not only about organizational behavior, but this whole  business of how do you understand the behavior of governments, governmental  organizations. Graham Allison was his research assistant, or some associate of  his, and was the rapporteur of the group. And out of that in some ways came the  book Essence of Decision. 76 When I started to look at this business about organizational behavior, I looked around and located this cluster of people at Carnegie  that was intellectually attracted to it. Then I went and talked to the people at the  Harvard Business School to see what they were doing about trying to understand  organizational behavior. It was there that I came upon these notions of strategy  that they were developing. And both of those things had, I think, a really big  impact on what I did later.  The other thing that happened about that time—some of it predates my going off  to Paris—was that James Schlesinger had come to RAND to spend a summer in ‘62,  I believe, and we became acquainted and friends. Then he came back as a fulltime person just about the time I was leaving for Paris [summer 1963]. But after I returned, I spent a lot of time talking with him. One of the things that the two of us  read, about somewhere in that period, was Robert Ardrey’s The Territorial Imperative. 77  And I got very interested in, “Here’s another way of thinking about human beings  and how they behave.” Still later, and not so much based on Ardrey’s stuff, but on  the work of other people, I became further interested in these nonrational aspects  of behavior. And I arrived at this notion that maybe RAND is not a rational animal. 
- Q4: That’s it right there.  
- Marshall: And there are interesting things to be said about that. Also, Schlesinger  and I began to talk, probably in the ‘68–‘69 period, about the implications of all of  that stuff that Ardrey and others were doing by that time. I’m thinking about the  psychological and political impact of military forces.  So it seems to me, intellectually, the organizational, behavioral stuff, plus Crozier’s  connection of the organizational stuff to culture, and this ethology, led me to this  low opinion or critique of the standard deterrence theories, the whole rational actor  view. And, of course, I obviously, from the ‘50s, was already a little skeptical about  rationality as a way of thinking about what people do or predicting what they do.  Then, I don’t understand exactly now why I wrote that ‘66 paper on assessing military power [Problems of Estimating Military Power].78 I was encouraged to do it by  Bill Kaufmann for some political science association meeting here in Washington  [the paper says, “American Political Science Meetings in New York, September 6–9,  1966”]. 1966 seems early to me, at least in terms of my memory, because—maybe  it happened earlier than I thought—Fred Wikner, who I don’t know if some of  you know, visited RAND to obtain analytic support for his work. There had been  created here in the Defense Department a Net Technical Assessment function.  He came to RAND, but my memory of it is that this was probably ‘67, ‘68 [not ‘66,  when Problems of Estimating Military Power was written]. And I started to do a little  work for him on a contract about, “How do you do net technical assessments?  How would you really think about that?”79 Anyway, the chronology here may be  wrong, and something that one needs to check.  
- Q2: He came out to RAND in ‘67, ‘68 and asked you to start working on this?  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q2: So it was created in ‘64, ‘65?  
- Marshall: I don’t know. That’s something that needs to be checked. I don’t know  what the chronology is. My guess is the earliest it probably was created was ‘66.80  But I don’t know whether one of the reasons for writing that…paper on assessing  the military balance [Problems of Estimating Military Power] was to support Wikner.  I just can’t remember why I did that. I guess something I need to do is to go back  and look at the papers I wrote for Wikner.  Also something that happened about this time is Harry Rowen became the president of RAND, sometime in ‘67. Jim Schlesinger and I used to spend a lot of time  with him because both of us thought there were a lot of problems at RAND and  that maybe he was going to fix them.81 It didn’t happen that way, but… One of  the things that did was lead to this creation of a new post of Director of Strategic  Studies—that is, dealing with strategic forces—that Schlesinger took over in  probably the spring of ‘68 [1967].82  Then Schlesinger left RAND in very late ‘68 to rejoin some of the transition teams  in the turnover that was taking place to the Nixon Administration, and then left  permanently in January of ‘69. Rowen asked me to take over the position of Director of Strategic Studies, which led to my doing a lot of thinking about the strategic program. Out of that came this thing that I wrote on the long-term competition  [Long-Term Competition with the Soviets: A Framework for Strategic Analysis].83  I guess I was moved to do that because when I looked at what people were working on at RAND with respect to strategic forces, it just seemed kind of a mishmash  of all kinds of things. So I tried to address the question, “What if you really had  some sort of program that had some intellectual strategy to it? What should it  look like?” And so I addressed the question of, “How should you think about strategic forces?” Then the things that came back to me were, first, these ideas from  the early ‘50s of, you’re in an extended competition with the other side. Then,  from the Harvard Business School stuff that I had been spending a lot of time  on since the middle ‘60s, comes this notion, you should have a strategy for this  competition. And one of the things you want to focus on are your strengths and  weaknesses, his strengths and weaknesses. One of your objectives is to drive him  out of business. There may be some risks in doing some things too hastily, and  you want to look at that. And then, what you’re talking about are organizations,  and they have all kinds of built-in vulnerabilities, problems that they can’t correct  very easily, and so there may be things you can exploit.  I just had this sense that this is a terrific new way of looking at these things. At  one level, it all seems to me very obvious—yes, you should look at things like that.  And it’s odd, as I say, that some of the people at RAND in the early years had some  of these views although they weren’t integrating them with these ideas on the  behavior of organizations and so on. It’s just odd to me, as I think about it, that  this kind of perspective just disappeared from the middle ‘50s until the late ‘60s.  And so that’s what I have to say on that, I think. We can take it up later. But let me  just run over a couple of things.  What about the contrast with the mainline thinking at RAND? One contrast is,  and we’ve talked about it already: I believed counterforce was possible. During  much of the time, people at RAND didn’t.84 Even the shooting down of the U-2  didn’t really make people feel that it was entirely possible, although it shifted the  balance of argument.  
- Q3: Could you expand on that a little bit, the shooting down of the U-2 and its  effect?  
- Marshall: It made public the fact that you had this reconnaissance thing. And, in  fact, I remember Alain Enthoven stopping me in the parking lot and saying something like, “Now I understand why you’ve been…”85  Most of the rest of my outline we’ve already talked about. Let me just end with  some comments about the national level or the more general things. It’s something I’ve talked a lot about. I think World War II and the kind of generation of  people who came out of it, who played an important role, already had some  important level of participation in it, are very important. It had a big impact, I  think, on the character of the thinking of the people at RAND. It had an impact on  those who had come from that the World War II experience, somebody like Hitch,  for example, or people in the Eisenhower Administration—I think there were a lot  of the same people. I think it needs to be articulated and understood, but I just have the feeling that people who went through that in some responsible position  just came away with a sense of, life is serious, you make decisions, if you have a  problem you think about it, and then you decide what you’re going to do.  The reason I raise that is I think that in the Eisenhower period, when you had this big  shift taking place that we talked about earlier, because of the growth of the nuclear  stockpiles on both sides, there was a whole succession of special study groups and  so on. It seems to me symptomatic that soon after a problem was surfaced, a serious group of people was put together to look at it and they came up with suggestions. The suggestions were not always followed, but the issues were addressed.  There was also in the Eisenhower period this whole notion of an extended  competition. For example, the question of, “Should we overspend?” There was a  longer-term perspective, particularly in the early years. I think, given the performance of the U.S. government from the early ‘60s on, the work in the ‘50s is  impressive to me. Maybe if you look back in detail it wouldn’t come out that way,  but that’s the way I feel.  It’s certainly different in my view, than in the late ‘60s, early ‘70s, when you have  this final kind of coming to terms, in a certain sense, with strategic parity. Here we  were, we had an overall strategy relative to the Russians, particularly in our alliance arrangements and so on, that in some ways depended on an advantage in  strategic weaponry. Parity happens, and there is no reconsideration of, “Now we  have a different situation, should we do something differently? Do we now have  to have a different balance in conventional forces?” Never even addressed. And  when the people were writing Henry Kissinger’s memoirs on this period, I asked  them, Peter Rodman and Bill Hyland—and I was there part of that time—“Was  this issue ever raised?” Their answer was, basically, they saw no record of it.86  Now it seems to me, in addition, of course, that another period that deserves a lot  of study is the period around ‘63, ‘64, where in the aftermath of the Cuban missile  crisis I think there was just a big shift. I don’t know whether it was that people  found that experience on reflection or even at the time so terrifying that they  never wanted to be anywhere as near as close that they thought they might be  to real war, but I think there was a big shift. Kennedy came in on the argument  that Eisenhower wasn’t doing enough, that we’ve got to up the budget, we’ve  got to compete more effectively, and so on, and all of a sudden there’s this switch  and we’re into arms control, settling for parity and even, to some extent in the  administration, but certainly later in the Congress, there were these regulations,  stipulations, limits on the accuracy of our weapons so that we don’t threaten the  Soviet silos.87 There was a whole set of decisions which are, in my view, anti-strategic or represented a loss of nerve. And so there was a period in there when we  were, in some sense, allowing the Soviets to impose costs on us by the increases  they were making in the accuracy of their weapons and retrofit programs and  so on, increases in hardness and some other things, efforts to begin looking at  global missiles and so on, while we were abstaining from imposing similar costs  on them as “unfair,” “destabilizing,” and all that horseshit.  So I think—I’m never going to do that—but I keep proposing to people that they  really look at that, these special aspects of the people, the generation from World War II, this kind of critical period in the early ‘60s, when I think there was a kind of  flip-flop, switch…loss of nerve, really.  Then there was also, when you get to Kissinger—it isn’t that he’s to be picked  on—this wide class of people with this pessimism about the U.S. competing with  the Russians over the long term, which is one of the fruits of this absolutely awful  effort by not just the CIA, but almost the whole of academia, on the Russian economy—its problems, the size of the military burden, and all of those things. I think  it’s really true that Henry saw himself, with what he thought of as kind of an idiotic  populace, making the best deal with this power that was going to dominate inevitably. The thing that differentiated Schlesinger from him was…  In fact, I remember in a Time article [11 Feb ‘74] there was a little box in the middle  of the article which had one of the most significant statements by Schlesinger—  but most people don’t pay any attention to it—that he saw himself as a “revivalist,”  getting people’s spirits up.88 Why the hell should we lose? He certainly didn’t think  that we were going to necessarily lose. But there certainly was a lot of that.  And I think you can’t understand why these analyses of the Soviet economy and  other things were so lousy unless you go back to the ‘30s and the ‘40s and the  generation of people who came along and dominated much of the economics  profession and certainly did not believe in free markets.  
- Q2: How would you weigh that in relation to this sense that there was a sort of lost  faith in America and American ideals after Vietnam? Is it your sense that—Which  one do you think was most important in this kind of fatalism or pessimism about  being able to compete with the Soviets—is it the loss of faith in America, or these  lousy estimates on the Soviets, that they could build, build, build and it didn’t cost  them anything?  
- Marshall: I don’t know. I was never affected very much by this, the Vietnam thing.  I’m not a good person to judge how others felt about that. But I don’t think…I  paid next to no attention. But I don’t have a good feel for it. It certainly shook up  people. I don’t know. I’m not a good judge of that.  
- Q7: But you did write a paper. There was a short paper involved, a rebuttal to somebody, maybe Kaufmann or somebody else, talking about Vietnam as a military  failure, a failure of military organizations to adapt.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q7: …a RAND paper.  
- Q3: There was a Bob Komer paper.89  
- Q7: Maybe it was a response to Komer.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q7: …you had taken issue with Komer…  
- Q4: I’d like to come back to your point about the economists.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q4: Let’s see if I got this right. Some of what happened in the ‘60s, was perhaps determined by the fact that the economists who were beginning to predominate at  that point in time were really trained in the Depression period with the notion that the  free enterprise system doesn’t work. Planned systems do work. Therefore the Russians, because they have a planned system will work better than… Is that kind of…  
- Marshall: Yeah, that’s right. See, it’s a goddam scandal, I think, the way that G. Warren  Nutter was treated. When you read his book now—it’s true he spoke more vigorously—but the book itself is the mildest statement of … poses the question, What  reason is there to believe that in the longer term the centrally managed economy  will grow faster than the free economy?90 He put a lot of information on the table  that suggested there wasn’t any reason. But he was seen as an absolute ideologue  and really excluded from first-rate universities. He just wouldn’t be considered for  Yale or places like that. And for that reason, this guy ended up at the University of  Virginia. It’s these other guys who are the ideologues, the whole bunch of them,  largely, and even at RAND, somebody as sensible as Hitch. I think it was Allen  Wallis who was telling me about how the criticism that was made of the RAND  economics effort on the Soviet Union…which was a whole bunch of people, Abe  Bergson-trained people, violently…treated any criticism as being ideological,  when the fact was here were these guys with all their few suppositions….  One of the things I guess I forgot to comment on: Here Loftus and I were trying to  get this work done, do this projection. We would come to RAND economists analyzing the Soviet economy and ask them questions. In the first place, they had no  answers, or didn’t even want to work on any serious problems. And they claimed,  “Oh, we can’t make answers to questions like that.” I guess that led me, along with  other times, to have this view that poor answers to good questions are a lot more  valuable than good answers to poor questions. These, we thought, were the good  questions that people really ought to be working on. But you couldn’t get any of  those guys to even address them. They had their things. These people were not  only worthless on the few questions, but had over time, I think, perpetrated this  view of the Soviets as constantly growing, a very inflated view of their GNP, while  simultaneously underestimating the size of the resources going into the military.  See, it was explained to them, “How was it that in this somewhat smaller economy, let’s say half ours, they could spend six percent of their GNP and have a  military establishment which in many ways was competitive with ours?” We were  spending five percent of our GNP. Well, they would say we don’t have complex  economic arguments about how…though they were more efficient in those  industries of that sort.  
- Q2: Capture economies of scale.  
- Q4: In reference to your comments on Kissinger: To what extent were Kissinger’s  views a reflection of his predictions on the Russians, as opposed to his sort of  pessimistic views about the Western side…  
- Marshall: Combination of both. Certainly pessimism about us and…  
- Q7: Especially about the Congress.  
- Marshall: But he also made this argument that they’re this, in some sense, young,  vigorous, expansionist society, with faith in what they’re doing.
- Q3: I have one quick note on this subject of the economists and a comment on your  talk overall. In talking to people of your age, who reflect some of these views,  have some of these views on the Soviet economy…which is not so much that  they went through the ‘30s and saw the failure of market economies, but that  they went through the ‘30s and saw what the conventional economists had said  about the Soviet economy and how poor it was…  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q3: …and then they saw the expansion of World War II and these vast amounts  of military production of the Soviets. And then the view was, to give my father’s  version, “All the goddam economists were wrong. They said the Soviet economy  was worthless, wasn’t worth anything, and here were these 40,000 tanks that  came out.”  
- Marshall: Right.  
- Q3: So it was essentially that that economy, in fact, had triumphed. That’s the footnote.  The general comment is, I think this was great. This talk is great for one primary  reason: The conventional view of the relationship of the RAND analytical community to the American defense establishment was that you have a bunch of military  officers who, for a variety of reasons, were pathological and ignore reality. And  yet a bunch of brilliant, objective scientists at RAND who [indistinct] perceived  reality, and you proceed to set the situation straight. What you portray is a picture  of analysis as a social phenomenon, in which you have communities of people  at work on various problems. And reality and truth in these social communities  may be [indistinct] a generation. The Great Depression is one of them. World War  II is another event. The explosion in thermonuclear power is another event. And  the Cuban missile crisis is the fourth. There’s obviously others, but those seem to  be the four events over a period of maybe 30, 40 years. And once every 10, 15,  20 years something really comes and knocks in on these communities and kind  of forces them to sort of look out [indistinct] and reorient them slightly. But then  after these shocks, they…something happens and then they behave in terms of  their product in ways which are determined by the nature of their internal social  dynamics more than it is by… This is not a perfect explanation of what [indistinct], but it tells you more what’s going on than the model of, analytical scientist  looking at a fact or reality and analyzing it and coming to an objective [indistinct].  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q3: As I listen to the whole of your presentation, I think you’re not only kind of setting the record straight with regard to the ‘50s and ‘60s, but you’re also presenting  here a fairly coherent view of how it is collective intellectual activity takes place in  the context of these [indistinct] states. It’s that there is a social theory of intellectual output.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q3: Not an unimpressive accomplishment. But, the thing to do is to take—OK, is  that right or is that wrong? OK, I think that’s the view which you have used to  structure. You might want to go back and think about, “OK now, is that absolutely right, or how would we go about thinking about whether or not that has captured the whole picture or some important part of some other thing?” [Indistinct]  But as it is, I think this is fantastic.  
- Q2: What do you want to do with the book? What do you want… You said you want  this to be an intellectual history. But what do you want beyond that? What do you  want it to do?  
- Marshall: I don’t know if I really want it to do anything. I don’t have any great goals  for that.  
- Q2: I’m not talking about what kind of sales you want to make…  
- Q4: The last chapter, I think, remains to be written, and it’s the question that [indistinct], given that you capture that, what does that enable you to say about the  future? Don’t trust societies except when you can shake them?  
- Marshall: Yeah, in a way, this thing today is a little too down on RAND because I  think it really was a fantastic place, and lots of good things do happen, and it was  a place at which people thought about some things where they certainly were on  the right line of many things, like this whole business of hardening and protection. I mean the Air Force was just crazy. As Herman Kahn used to say, hardening  is like, supposing a man just hates aluminum…  
- Q3: They hate the color gray…  
- Marshall: Yes, right.  
- Q3: …and you come up with this great new stuff which is twice as strong and half  the weight, and you say, “I just created…,” and they say, “But it’s gray.” And then  you paint it blue. But they say, “It’s still gray underneath.”  
- Marshall: That’s exactly right. You know, that’s the way they felt about hardening.  Putting one of these pretty, almost bird-like things [bombers] into a shelter underground! “Jesus Christ!” “‘What’s that for?”  So there’s things like that or—which I didn’t talk about—the kind of questions that  people were raising about the targeting policy, particularly in the early years at RAND,  and which Brodie joined in.91 Right, I mean it had very little impact on the notion that…  
- Q3: That was the thing that you did more of in the talk at Harvard, what is the impact of what’s going on at RAND on the [indistinct].  
- Marshall: Yeah, right. But you’re right, I mean about certainly this kind of, like, social  processes of analysis.  
- Q7: It struck me… I guess I have two observations—what you said about the social  phenomena of the organization, and what you said about these flashes of insight  of the obvious. And I think the preceding discussion provides a good explanation  for why the obvious, or why innovation, whether it’s military or otherwise, is often  very reluctantly accepted until the evidence is almost overwhelming, because “It  doesn’t fit my model” or “It doesn’t fit my…”  
- Q3: From the standpoint of a card-carrying academic, let me tell you, that’s how it  works in the academic world—very slow. 
- Q7: …the second is… You alluded to, but didn’t go into much detail on the work  that you did with respect to intelligence and strategic warning.  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q7: And yet I think it would be interesting for a lot of people to hear more about that,  and to make the link, as evidently you’re going to do with Graham Allison, with what  Roberta Wohlstetter eventually produced [Pearl Harbor: Warning and Decision].92  
- Marshall: Well…  
- Q7: Because if you talk about the World War II generation and what made it…  
- Marshall: Yeah.  
- Q7: …Pearl Harbor…  
- Q3: She does have that acknowledgment…93  
- Marshall: I forget exactly whether I proposed the topic to her, or she had several  options and I said, “Pick that one, there are a lot of things to be done there.”  
- Q7: I mean that really speaks to the psyche of the generation that comes out of  World War II in terms of avoiding another Pearl Harbor.  
- Marshall: That was very big, there’s no doubt about that. And that’s why you have, I  think, all of this focus on withstanding a first strike. Again, you see, almost everything that came out of RAND was premised on the notion that we just were not  going to start the war. And that’s why this other, small cluster of guys said, “Wait  a minute. Here’s the situation. Well, why wouldn’t we strike first? And here’s about  the time we ought to be doing it. Don’t wait until it’s too late.” So everything was  really focused on the notion that the other side was probably going to get in the  first blow. And then you have to design against that.  
- Q7: You were also involved in the Gaither Committee, which is a direct reaction to  what is perceived to be going on with the Soviets, and their ability to attack with  little or no warning, and then Albert Wohlstetter writes his paper [“The Delicate  Balance of Terror”]…94  
- Marshall: The main trigger for the Gaither Committee, even though it didn’t turn  out to be quite that…was the calculations that were being done by this Net Evaluation Subcommittee of the NSC that Eisenhower had set up in the early years of  his administration.95 With the rapidly rising stockpiles and the yields of weapons,  you had to face the question, What are you going to do about this? So the stimulus was, really, how to defend the country. And the offensive side got…  
- Q7: Civil defenses…  
- Marshall: Yeah. So it was active defenses… Actually, Jerry Wiesner headed a group  that was part of the Gaither Committee. One of these things was looking at ballistic missile defenses.96 He turned “traitor” later, I mean left that… But all kinds of  crazy things were going on. There was a set of people, also up at MIT, earlier that  was very against thermonuclear weapons development.  
- Q7: Herbert York, wasn’t he Ike’s adviser at the time? He certainly wrote a lot of papers  after the fact that he was against the development of the thermonuclear weapon. 
- Q4: In subsequent lectures, chapters, you’re going to deal ·with intelligence and  your role?  Marshall: Well, I’m going to get on to the ‘70s, and the ‘80s, and so on, so I mean the  ‘70s… Yes.  Q4: About an hour and a half ago, you made a comment, you sort of said, there is a  sentence something like, “Oh, and then there was my involvement in warning, but  that wasn’t particularly intellectually rewarding,” or something.  
- Marshall: It didn’t do a lot for me, intellectually, I don’t think, as against these other  things.  
- Q4: There is a path, that when you get into the ‘70s, I think you ought to go back to  the ‘50s and ‘60s and bring that…  
- Marshall: Alright.  
- Q4: …and make that a full picture, because I think there is a lot that you can say  about, well, indications and warning, for example.  
- Q3: There is one aspect, which you did highlight with regard to its effect on you,  which does have to do with intelligence, which is the one sentence that I remember, which is that “COMINT was very rich in those days.”  
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q3: And there is some stuff in the open literature about Soviet weaknesses in  encryption practices and stuff like that. Now, obviously it’s very difficult or very  sensitive to think about how you do that.  
- Marshall: Yes. We’re not going to do much writing on that.  [Indistinct; multiple voices]  
- Q3: But yet your access to that form of intelligence played a very major role in…  
- Marshall: Oh yes, absolutely. It all really happened because of my targeting work,  initially. Then in the summer of ‘52, the guy who ran Air Force Intelligence in  Europe [Gen. Millard “Poppy” Lewis] approached RAND and wanted some work  done on various topics, and one of them was strategic warning. Hitch asked me  and Jim Digby to work on that. I went and lived for five months in Wiesbaden, I  guess, at that time. First, we wrote some stuff and had to convince some people in  Washington before we spent four or five months in Wiesbaden working on that.97  Then this, whole intelligence thing became a very big part of what I did, because I  had some comparative advantage in that.  But there were other things that I did. Harvey DeWeerd and I did some work in the  middle ‘50s on tactical nuclear weapons and civilian casualties in Western Europe and  what might happen and what you might do about that, our own targeting policy.98  
- Q7: Was the lack of intellectual reward a function of your knowledge of that special  intelligence and the feeling of, there wasn’t that much to be concerned about in  terms of a surprise attack?  
- Marshall: No, no. I think it was just that it wasn’t until Loftus came there, and we really got into this business of how do you think about problems of forecasting and understanding what the Russians are really doing, that, from the longer-run point  of view, I feel that there’s something interesting to talk about, because it then  leads to all these other things. The strategic warning thing didn’t have that. There’s  some insights into how crazy some of our own arrangements could be, but that’s  just part of 60,000 instances of where less-than-optimal behavior is underway.  
- Q2: What happened to Loftus? You don’t mention him when you come back from  Paris. Did he leave RAND, or…?  
- Marshall: In the middle ‘60s, he retired on a kind of medical disability. I think it was  a complicated thing. I think partly psychological, partly physical. I used to see him  occasionally when I went out to visit him. But he was a terrific guy, really.  
- Q7: But even in later years, when you’d keep reaching back from the office, you keep  reaching back to Loftus because he had knowledge of special sources…  
- Marshall: That’s right.  
- Q7: …and special operations…  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q7: You’re trying to get guys to go tap Loftus’s memory.  
- Marshall: He really was a fantastic guy. He was a fellow who had been a Notre  Dame football player. He spent the war in PT boats, about 18 months circling  Shemya Island.  
- Q4: Eighteen months going around Shemya in a PT boat?  
- Marshall: Right. And after the war, he went to Johns Hopkins, I think as an economics PhD. And for some reason, he got very early interested in nuclear things. Then,  maybe in ‘48 or ‘49, I don’t know, he went into intelligence and headed up the Air  Force… It was earlier than that, because he was on board when the first nuclear  weapon went off, the Russian one. So he probably joined that in about ‘48, and he  was the head of the Air Force’s whole effort on following the Soviet nuclear program.99 Then, as I say, he was there till he came to RAND about… he might have  come to RAND just before I left for Chicago.100  
- Q2: Did he come to RAND as an Air Force officer?  
- Marshall: No, he was a civilian.  
- Q7: There was an effort that you were interested in at one point in the ‘70s, where it  was the Soviet control of nuclear weapons—  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q7: —and some of the knowledge that Loftus had was [indistinct].  
- Marshall: Yeah, right. Also he and I, in the middle ‘50s, when both of us, again,  knew that counterforce clearly was far more feasible than anybody at RAND had  thought about, he and I, but particularly he, went back and looked at, did some  very interesting work on· World War II counterforce efforts against the German  V-ls and V-2s—the efforts were called Operation Crossbow—and looked for the  lessons you could learn about, OK, if you go for counterforce, how do you really  have to do it? Let’s look at a case where people really were serious and did this. 101 Loftus died about a year ago.  
- Q2: Andy, how do you deal with, in your intellectual construct… I wouldn’t ask it  now, except while, since we’re on the subject of ·organizational behavior, how do  you deal with individuals? How do you deal with dominant personalities? How  do you deal with the impact of somebody like a Marshal Nikolai Ogarkov on the  Soviet military, the Soviet military writ large? Do you just include that as part of  your organizational paradigm, or those are all excursions?  
- Marshall: I don’t know. I guess that’s another factor. Clearly, there are individuals that  matter at various points in time. I don’t know, I guess you just have to be aware of  that, and try to deal with that. But I don’t have anything very systematic…  
- Q2: Well, we’ve always asked the intelligence community, “Well, what can you tell us  about”—pick one, Chervov, or whoever—and they always invariably come back  and go, “Beats the shit out of me. He drinks scotch, likes jazz…” I mean…  
- Marshall: Oh yeah, well that. Yeah, actually I got into some of that for Henry  Kissinger. Henry was very brilliant and liked to know about these key individuals,  particularly at the political level. Again, the big failure of the intelligence community to really know… They had some capabilities in that area, but they were very  snooty about it. You know, “That’s not our top-line product. Why does Henry…  why are you so interested in that?” You know, kind of hand’s length, holding their  nose, “If you really want it…,” you know. “Why don’t you read our top-line (worthless) estimate?”  
- Q2: But you don’t seem to…  
- Marshall: I don’t feel I have anything special to say. Obviously some individuals  matter enormously. At RAND, I think, at the beginning of it, individuals mattered  tremendously. The leadership was the key people. They just had a big impact on  the kind of organization of RAND.  
- Q2: One of the things that comes to mind is this Dead Hand system that first John  Hines told me about—  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q2: —then finally Bruce Blair blurbs it out in The Washington Post [New York Times].102  But, you know, in large part the Soviet general officers that John talked to said  that came about primarily because, as a result of this couple of exercises where  General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev and Prime Minister Alexei Kosygin said, “Look,  we are not going to initiate a nuclear strike.” That the Soviet General Staff said, “OK  fine, we’ll bypass the military and political leadership. We’ll set up this system that  automatically does it.” Clearly, that’s a major… If there wasn’t Brezhnev or Kosygin  or somebody else in there they’d go, “Yeah, no problem. Last guy that stands is  Russian. That’s all we care about.” Major impact on—But we’re just so lousy at it  that it’s not even… Approach it episodically as best you can?  
- Marshall: Yeah, right. Anyway, I don’t think I have anything special to say on that.  
- Q3: Well, except in this special context of the RAND business, the system of the key  men. You talked a little bit about it, and when I went through some of your oral  histories out at RAND… Because Frank Collbohm’s role… 
- Marshall: Yes.  
- Q3: …why were these special conditions created and preserved over a long period  at RAND?  Marshall: Yes, that’s right.  
- Q3: And if you just read about Collbohm, it seems like he gets into a screaming fit with  the Air Force just about every day in order to safeguard the RAND people from…  
- Marshall: And most of the RAND people were not at all grateful. They thought he  was kind of dumb, a dumb engineer.  [Indistinct; multiple voices]  I mean the initial sort of notion of what this place should be like and how people  should be treated is truly extraordinary.  
- Q3: If it hadn’t been for him…  
- Marshall: That’s right, it probably wouldn’t have happened. Well, with the possible  exception that General “Hap” Arnold [Commanding General of the Army Air  Forces]…[gap for tape change] …I think it came out in one of those innovations  meetings that we had.  
- Q3: Right.  Marshall: Arnold’s view.  
- Q3: [Indistinct] Which in World War II gives him his vision of technology and the  development of his relationship [indistinct].  
- Marshall: Yeah, that’s right. [Indistinct] individuals who [indistinct] had a very longterm perspective [indistinct].  
- Q3: This is something that it might be interesting to track down, see whether or not,  either at RAND or in Collbohm’s family there are records that would indicate how  he thought about setting up RAND as a special place.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q7: The parallel—well, this is not an exact parallel, but—is J. Robert Oppenheimer  and the scientists at Los Alamos, General Leslie Groves tends to push military  norms on these people. I don’t know if that ever went through his mind…  
- Q3: I’m not sure. I don’t know much about it. I think it’s also something of an  oversimplified picture. I mean it’s Leslie Groves who picks Oppenheimer. Oppenheimer’s not the leading candidate—it’s James Conant. Conant is “Mr. American  Establishment Scientist,” the man with all the credentials. And it’s clear from what  Groves thought at the time, “I know Conant, I know this other…Ernest Lawrence,  and I’ve never heard of Oppenheimer.” [Indistinct]…he’s the only person who can  make this whole program run. It’s Oppenheimer who always had very nice things  to say about Groves.  [Indistinct; multiple voices]  
- Q7: …it was two other things. It was, number one, his ability to manage, which I  guess the other two, Lawrence and Conant, had also demonstrated. But there were a lot of frictions, too, between what Groves wanted to do with those people  and what Oppenheimer wouldn’t let him do with them.  
- Q3: Yeah, true.  
- Q7: When you were talking about earlier how to organize the book, are you looking  for something to organize the entire book?  
- Marshall: No, I think we have an idea about the organization of the book as a whole.  It’s how in each of these chapters to deal with this intellectual history, and then  there’s what was happening in the organization, in the immediate organization,  and what’s happening maybe more broadly [indistinct].  
- Q2: Organizing themes…  
- Marshall: …how to do that.  
- Q3: Well, there are at least three of them stressed: Andy’s intellectual development;  did it alter the analytical community at RAND; and then what the hell is going on  in the rest of the world? Well, the real world, in terms of what people actually do.  
- Marshall: Yeah, right.  
- Q3: And that’s not such a [indistinct] thing to do.  
- Marshall: Now there will be later sessions on the ‘70s, ‘80s, early ‘90s, I guess—I  don’t know where to cut it off.  
- Q3: From a literary point of view, the way you did it today was effective. You say,  RAND in some sense reaches its culminating point of glory sometime around  1960. And then, “What was it like?” And then going back, “How did we get there?”  From a story point of view it works.  
- Q7: Schlesinger once had a short comment—or at least it was attributed to him—  he said, “RAND was a dung heap, but sometimes in dung heaps roses grow.”  
- Q3: Unfortunately, there are lots of dung heaps. And roses.  
- Marshall: OK. Well, thank you.

* * *

### Endnotes 
1 Eds: This chapter includes two sections. The first section covers the early 1950s and is excerpted from an interview focused on the book project conducted on 16 September 1993. The  second section covers the entire period from 1950 to 1969 and is an interview conducted on 29  October 1993. The outline was prepared for the second interview.  
2 Eds: Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, ed. Eduardo Nolla, trans. James T. Schleifer,  (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 2010) I: 655–656.  
3 Eds: Ernest R. May, John D. Steinbruner, and Thomas W. Wolfe, History of the Strategic Arms  Competition, 1945-1972, Part I, Alfred Goldberg, ed., (Office of the Secretary of Defense Historical Office, March 1981).  
4 Eds: David Alan Rosenberg, “American Atomic Strategy and the Hydrogen Bomb Decision,”  The Journal of American History, 66, no. 1 (June 1979): 65–87.  
5 Eds: Thomas B. Cochran, William M. Arkin, Robert S. Norris, and Milton M. Hoenig, Nuclear  Weapons Databook: Volume II, U.S. Nuclear Warhead Production (Cambridge: Ballinger, 1987), 16.  
6 Eds: Thomas B. Cochran and Robert Standish Norris, Russian/Soviet Nuclear Warhead Production, NWD 93-1 (Washington: National Resources Defense Council, 1993), 20.  
7 Eds: Basic National Security Policy, NSC 162/2, 30 Oct. 1953, in Foreign Relations of the United States, 1952–1954, National Security Affairs, Vol. 2, Part 1, 578-82; John Foster Dulles, “The  Evolution of Foreign Policy,” Speech before the Council on Foreign Relations, New York (12  Jan 1954) in Department of State Bulletin, 30, no. 761 (25 Jan 1954): 107–110; Lawrence Freedman, The Evolution of Nuclear Strategy, 2nd ed. (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1989), 76–90.  
8 Eds: Robert S. Norris and Hans M. Kristensen, “Global Nuclear Weapons Inventories, 1945-  2010,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists (July/Aug. 2010): 81.  
9 Eds: Lorenz M. Luthi, The Sino-Soviet Split: Cold War in the Communist World (Princeton:  Princeton University Press, 2008); Chen Jian, Mao’s China and the Cold War (Chapel Hill:  University of North Carolina Press, 2001); Michael S. Gerson, The Sino-Soviet Border Conflict:  Deterrence, Escalation, and the Threat of Nuclear War in 1969, CRM D0022974.A2 (Arlington:  CNA, 2010), 6–9.  
10 Eds: General Maxwell D. Taylor, The Uncertain Trumpet (New York: Harper, 1960).  
11 Eds: Freedman, Evolution of Nuclear Strategy, 227–244.  
12 Excerpted from an interview conducted 16 September 1993. See also “The Development of  Strategic Thinking at the RAND Corporation, 1948-1963: An Economist’s View,” transcript  by James Digby and Joan Goldhamer, 2 Aug 1985; Transcript of interview of Marshall by Alfred Goldberg and Maurice Matloff (Historical Office, Office of the Secretary of Defense), 1  Jun 1992, 1–9.  
13 Herbert Goldhamer and Andrew W. Marshall, The Frequency of Mental Disease: Long-Term  Trends and Present Status, R-157 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., July 1949), published as the  book Psychosis and Civilization: Two Studies in the Frequency of Mental Disease (Glencoe: Free  Press, 1953).  
14 Andrew W. Marshall, “Forward” to Herbert Goldhamer, The 1951 Korean Armistice Conference:  A Personal Memoir, P-7869 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 1994), xi–xii.  
15 For background on the “criteria problem,” see Charles J. Hitch and Roland N. McKean, The  Economics of Defense in the Nuclear Age (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1960), 158–181;  R.N. McKean, “Criteria,” in Edward S. Quade, ed., Analysis for Military Decisions (Chicago:  Rand McNally & Co., 1967), 81–91. For examples of Marshall’s work in this area, see A.A.  Alchian, G.D. Bodenhorn, S. Enke, C.J. Hitch, J. Hirshleifer, and A.W. Marshall, What is the  Best System? D-860 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 4 Jan 1951); A. Alchian, J. Hirshleifer and  A. Marshall, Sound-Offs on Pay-offs, D-892 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 20 Jul7 1950); A.  Alchian, J. Hirshleifer, and A. Marshall, Report of Cost Team Plus Panel, D-829 (Santa Monica:  RAND Corp., 20 Sep 1950); J. Hirshleifer and A. Marshall, Proposed Payoff Criterion for MSA  [Multiple Strike Analysis], D-817 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 2 Oct 1950); J. Hirshleifer  and A. Marshall, Revised “Best Guess” Salvage Value Assumption for MSA, D-820 (Sant RAND Corp., 5 Oct 1950); J. Hirshleifer and A. Marshall, A Proposed Salvage Value Procedure  for MSA, RM-476 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 20 Oct 1950); A.W. Marshall and Stephen  Enke, The Subsitution Value of U-235 in Two Assumed Strategic Campaigns (U), D(L)-923 (Santa  Monica: RAND Corp., 20 Apr 1951), SECRET//RESTRICTED DATA (on the subject  of this report, see also Stephen Enke, “Defense Economics: Applying Economic Criteria,”  American Economic Review, 55, no. 2 (May 1965): 418–420; and Stephen Enke, “Some Economic Aspects of Fissionable Material,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 68, no. 2 (May 1954):  217–232; S. Enke, E.W. Lee, and A.W. Marshall, The Deployment of Local Defenses Suggested to  Barlow by Economics, D-935 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 11 May 1951).  A.W. Marshall, On the Accuracy of Immediate Bomb Damage Assessment with Radar  Observation of the Bomb Fall (U), D-989 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 6 Aug 1951), SECRET//RESTRICTED DATA; A.W. Marshall, Coverage and Separation Distance of Point  Targets (U), D-999 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 14 Aug 1951), SECRET//RESTRICTED  DATA; A.W. Marshall, The Estimation of Parameters in a Physical Vulnerability Model, D(L)-  1059 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 24 Oct 1951); A.W. Marshall, Probability, Coverage, and  Multi-element Targets, D(L)-1142 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 15 Jan 1952); Marc Peter, Jr.  and Andrew Marshall, A Re-examination of Hiroshima-Nagasaki Damage Data, RM-820 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 1 May 1952), FOUO.  A.W. Marshall and J.F. Digby, Indications of Imminent Hostilities (U), D-1477 (Santa Monica:  RAND Corp., 29 Dec 1952), CONFIDENTIAL; A.W. Marshall and J. F. Digby, The Military  Value of Advanced Warning of Hostilities and Its Implication for Intelligence Indicators (U), SM-14  (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 20 Jul 1953), TOP SECRET (classification probably has been  downgraded to CONFIDENTIAL or the document has been declassified). Digby discusses  this work briefly in “Contributions of RAND to Strategy in the 1950s,” in Andrew W. Marshall, J.J. Martin, and Henry S. Rowen, eds., On Not Confusing Ourselves: Essays on National Security Strategy in Honor of Albert and Roberta Wohlstetter (Boulder: Westview Press, 1991), 22. A  short summary of SM-14 appears in Merton E. Davies and William R. Harris, RAND’s Role in  the Evolution of Balloon and Satellite Observation Systems and Related Space Technology, R-3692-  RC (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Sep 1988), 49; J.E. Loftus and A.W. Marshall, The Limitations and Potentialities of the U.S. Strategic Warning System (U), D(L)-4944, TS-1710, Classified  (this paper is referred to in Joseph E. Loftus and Andrew W. Marshall, RAND Research on the  Soviet Military, D-4943-PR (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 21 Feb 1958); J.E. Loftus and  A.W. Marshall, Strategic Warning: A Proposed Collection Concept (U), D-6048 (Santa Monica:  RAND Corp., 20 Feb 1959), Classified; J.E. Loftus and A.W. Marshall, The Structure of the  U.S. Warning System (U), D-6064 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 26 Feb 1959), Classified;  J.E. Loftus and A.W. Marshall, Soviet Passive Detection Capability (U), D-6300 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 15 May 1959), Classified; Russell T. Nichols, Economics Division Progress  Report, D-3740 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 15 Jul 1956), 7; T.E. Greene and J. Vogel, Engineering Division Activity Report, First Half of 1956, D-3750 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp.,  15 Jul 1956), 46; Russell T. Nichols, Economic Analysis Department Progress Report, January 15,  1957, D-4052 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 7 Jan 1957); Russell T. Nichols, Economic Analysis Department Progress Report, D-4398 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 15 Jul 1957), 16–17, 19.  
16 B. Brodie, C.J. Hitch, and A.W. Marshall, The Next Ten Years, D-2700 (Santa Monica: RAND  Corp., 30 Dec 1954).  
17 A.W. Marshall and H.A. DeWeerd, Weapons Limitations and the Defense of Western Europe,  D-3785 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 27 Jul 1956); A.W. Marshall and H.A. DeWeerd,  Weapons Limitations, Nuclear Sharing, and Graduated Deterrence—A Report on a Trip to Washington, SHAPE, USAFE, and the United Kingdom, October 29–November 29, 1956, D(L)-4037-PR  (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 26 Dec 1956). Another DeWeerd-Marshall paper, Nuclear  Weapons Limitations and NATO, P-1013, 16 Jan 1957, is listed in Social Science Division, Social  Science Division Progress Report, June 30, 1957, D-4396-PR (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 1  Jul 1957).  
18 R.L. Belzer, W.W. Kellogg, A.W. Marshall, and J.S. Thompson, Preliminary Report of the  Reconnaissance Committee (U), D-1138 (Santa Monica: RA ND Corp., 1952), SECRET// RESTRICTED DATA; R.L. Belzer, W.W. Kellogg, A.W. Marshall, and J.S. Thompson,  The Monte Carlo Method Applied to a Comparison of Three Strategic Reconnaissance Strategies,  RM-811-2; Appendix, RM-811-3 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 16 Apr 1952), FOUO; H.  Kahn and A.W. Marshall, A Simplified Study of Reconnaissance in Strategic Bombing Campaigns,  RM-787 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 6 Mar 1952); A.W. Marshall, RAND Systems Analysis Course: Material for Workshop—A Study of Alternative Reconnaissance Strategies in Strategic  Bombing Campaigns, D(L)-2559 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 3 Nov 1954).  
19 J.E. Loftus and A.W. Marshall, Research On Soviet Military Programs (U), D(L)-6500 (Santa  Monica: RAND Corp., 26 Jun 1959), SECRET; J.E. Loftus and A.W. Marshall, On Improving Midterm Estimates of Soviet Military Capabilities for Use in U.S. Military Planning  (U), RM- 2892-PR (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Aug 1962), SECRET; J.E. Loftus and  A.W. Marshall, Forecasting Soviet Force Structure: The Importance of Bureaucratic and Budgetary  Constraints (U), RM-3612-PR (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Jul 1963), SECRET; Andrew  Marshall, “Propositions from Case Study on Forecasting Soviet Force Structure,” 20 Jul 1970,  in Hans Heymann, Jr., rapporteur, Bureaucracy and National Security Policy: A Conference Report  (Draft), R-644-PR/ARPA (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Feb 1971), 46–47; A.W. Marshall,  “Studies of Bureaucratic Decision making,” 14 Jan 1966, 2–3; Andrew W. Marshall, “Arms  Competitions: The Status of Analysis,” in Uwe Nerlich, ed., The Western Panacea: Constraining  Soviet Power through Negotiation, Volume II of Soviet Power and Western Negotiating Policies  (Cambridge: Ballinger Publishing Co., 1983), 6.  
20 Report to the President by the Security Resources Panel of the Office of Defense Mobilization  Science Advisory Committee, “Deterrence and Survival in the Nuclear Age,” 7 Nov 1957  (TOP SECRET; Declassified 10 Jan 1973), in Department of State, Foreign Relations of the  United States 1955-1957, Vol. 19: National Security Policy (Washington: CPO, 1990), 639–661.  While on the staff of the Gaither Committee, Marshall was a member of a “small group of  people with systems analysis-analytical kinds of skills that worked as consultants and experts  to people in the other panels and did various kinds of tasks.” Transcript of Marshall interview  by Goldberg and Matloff, 1 Jun 1992, 8. An organization chart for the committee shows an  “Evaluation Quantitative Assessments” group headed by Robert C. Prim (Bell Telephone  Labs) and Stanley J. Lawwill (Strategic Air Command).  Herbert Goldhamer and Andrew W. Marshall, with the assistance of Nathan Leites, The Deterrence and Strategy of Total War, 1959-1961: A Method of Analysis, RM-2301 (Santa Monica:  RAND Corp., 30 Apr 1959). An earlier version of this paper is Herbert Goldhamer and  Andrew W. Marshall, The Deterrence and Strategy of Total War, 1959-1960 (U), D-5614 (Santa  Monica: RAND Corp., 1 Oct 1958), Classified.  A.W. Marshall and J.W. Tukey, A Stringent Inspection Scheme Directed Against the Danger of  Surprise Attack (U), SAW/180, 2 Nov 1958, SECRET; Memo, Andrew W. Marshall, Vincent V.  McRae, and Albert Wohlstetter to Mr. Foster, subj: The “Accident” Problem, 19 Nov 1958, with  attachments, “Part I: The Problem of Nuclear Weapon Accidents and Other Causes of Accidental War”; “Part II: Some Comments on Specific Statements by Eastern Experts,” SAC/00/34,  File 9T.2 US Experts b. Inter-office Memos SAW/00/1-50, Meetings-Talks-Conferences,  Box 99, Lot no. 58D133, Records Relating to Disarmament, 1942-1962, 1953-62 Period,  General Records of the Department of State, Record Group 59, National Archives]; Summary  Minutes, Five Power Working Group Meeting on Systems of Control, 22 Oct 1958 (CONFIDENTIAL; Declassified 4 Oct 1994), SAW/FPC/4, File 9T.1 k. Five Power Conversations  SAW/FPC/1-11, Box 98, Lot 58D133, RG 59, National Archives. Marshall was a member of  the Instruments of Detection and Control Systems Croups of the U.S. delegation.  For discussions of the Surprise Attack Conference, see Bernhard C. Bechhoefer, Postwar Negotiations for Arms Control (Washington: Brookings Institution, 1961), 464–487; Johan J.  Holst, “Strategic Arms Control and Stability: A Retrospective Look,” in Holst and William  Schneider, Jr., Why ABM? Policy Issues in the Missile Defense Controversy (New York: Pergamon  Press, 1969), 245–284; and Memo, Rear Adm. Paul L. Dudley, USN to the Joint Chiefs of  Staff, subj: Report on the Conference on the Problem of Surprise Attack, Geneva, Switzerland,  30 Dec 1958 (SECRET//NOFORN; Declassified 4 Oct 1994), with attachment, “A Summary of the Preparatory and Conference Activities of the U.S. Delegation to the Conference  on the Problem of Surprise Attack” I File 9T.4 r. Proposed Basis for Examination of Possible  Systems for Observation and Inspection of Naval Force, Box 109, Lot no. 580133, RG 59,  National Archives.  
21 A.W. Marshall and J.E. Loftus, Latest AFCIN Missile Estimates for the 1965 War Game (U),  D-6242 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 28 Apr 1959), SECRET//RESTRICTED DATA;  A.W. Marshall and J.E. Loftus, Further information on 1965 War Game Assumptions: Missile  Reliability and Accuracy and Exchange of Intelligence (U), D-6375 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp.,  1 Jun 1959), Classified; Bruce L.R. Smith, The RAND Corporation: Case Study of a Nonprofit  Advisory Corporation (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1966), 170–171; Fred Kaplan, The  Wizards of Armageddon (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1983), 216–217; Memo, J.F. Digby  [no recipient] [no subject], 11 Feb 1959 (SECRET; Declassified 11 Dec 1985), RAND Archives/J. Digby Files/Box: Strategic Studies/F: SOFS 1959; “Agenda: Steering Committee  Meeting, Strategic Offensive Force Project,” 17–18 Feb 1959, RAND Archives/J. Digby Files/  Box: Administrative/Career; Memo, J.F. Digby and H.S. Rowen to SOFS Project Leaders,  subj: Some US and SU 1963 Posture Discussions, M-1425, 3 Mar 1959 (SECRET; Declassified 12 Dec 1985); Memo, J.F. Digby to SOFS Distribution List, subj: Review of Talks for  SOFS Steering Committee Meeting, M-3862, 18 Jun 1959, RAND Archives/J. Digby Files/  Box: Chronological Files; Memos: Outgoing (Defense), 1949–1951 & 1959–1960; List of  assorted SOFS-related documents provided by Walter Nelson (Head, Classified Information  Services, RAND Corp.), 25 Feb 1994.  
22 Social Science Division [Victor Hunt, W. Phillips Davison, Paul Kecskemeti, Irving Janis, Jean  Hungerford, Eric Willenz, Roberta Wohlstetter, and Joseph Goldsen], The Warning of Target  Populations in Air War: An Appendix of Working Papers, RM-275 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp.,  Nov 1949).  
23 Brodie joined RAND as a full-time senior staff member in Aug 1951. Barry H. Steiner, Bernard Brodie and the Foundations of American Nuclear Strategy, (Lawrence: University Press of  Kansas, 1991), 252.  
24 Ibid., 78–111. Brodie was special assistant to the Air Force Chief of Staff, Aug–Sep 1950, and  special assistant to the Air Force Chief of Staff, acting as RAND Corp. consultant, Nov–Jun  1951 (252).  
25 Bernard Brodie, “Must We Shoot from the Hip?” 4 Sep 1951, reprinted in Marc Trachtenberg,  ed., The Development of American Strategic Thought: Writings on Strategy, 1945-1951 (New York:  Garland Publishing, Inc., 1987), 235–272.  
26 Russell D. Buhite and Wm. Christopher Hamel, “War for Peace: The Question of an American Preventive War against the Soviet Union, 1945-1955,” Diplomatic History 1, 14, no. 3  (Summer 1990): 367–384; Marc Trachtenberg, “A ‘Wasting Asset’: American Strategy and  the Shifting Nuclear Balance, 1949-1954,” International Security, 13, no. 3 (Winter 1988/89):  5–49; John Williams, In Response to Paxon’s Memo on the Probability of War, D-1513 (Santa  Monica: RAND Corp., 3 Feb 1953); Williams, Regarding the Preventive-War Doctrine, D(L)-  1777 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 27 Jul 1953); Memo, Williams to Bernard Brodie, subj:  The Next Nine Years, 11 Months, M-5372, 25 Oct 1954; Memo, Williams to Brodie, subj:  The Subject, M-5598, 5 Nov 1954, RAND Archives, Digby Files/Box: Strategic Studies/File:  SOC, 1954-1955; Clay Blair, Jr., “The Passing of a Great Mind,” Life, 42, no. 8 (27 Feb 1957):  96; Steve J. Heims, John von Neumann and Norbert Wiener: From Mathematics to the Technologies  of Life and Death (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1980), 484; Norman Macrae, John von Neumann  (New York: Pantheon Books, 1992), 27–28, 332.  
27 John Williams, Hunting the Tiger (and Other Aspects of the Active Life) (U), S-16 (Santa Monica:  RAND Corp., 26 Mar 1954), SECRET.  
28 On von Neumann’s general interest in weather modification, see John von Neumann, 16–17.  
29 RAND’s Role in the Evolution of Balloon and Satellite Observation Systems and Related  Space Technology, 19–23, 39–43, 59–61, 74–77, 94.  
30 Rules for an Aggregated War Game, RM-1046-2 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 3 Feb 1954;  revised 27 Jul 1954).
31 Minutes of Strategic Objectives Committee [1960 Committee], 10 May 1954, RAND Archives/J. Digby Files/Box: Strategic Studies/File: SOC, 1954-1955.  
32 Minutes of Strategic Objectives Committee (1954—30 Apr, 10 May, 17 May, 24 May, 4 Jun,  25 Jun, 9 Jul, 23 Jul, 6 Aug, 3 Sep, 2 Dec; 1955—21 Jan, 4 Feb, 14 Feb, 7 Mar, 12 Apr, 25 Apr,  7 Jul) (Declassified 13 Dec 1985) RAND Archives/J. Digby Files/Box: Strategic Studies/  File: SOC, 1954-1955. Members of the SOC included Bernard Brodie, James Digby, Charles  Hitch (first chairman), Victor Hunt, Arnold Kramish, James Lipp (second chairman), Andrew  Marshall, Alex Mood, John Williams (third chairman), and, toward the end, Herman Kahn  and Malcolm Hoag.  
33 For criticisms of The Next Ten Years, see Memo, J.D. Williams to B. Brodie, C.J. Hitch, and  A.W. Marshall, subj: Unkind Comments on the Next Ten Years, M-4419, 2 Sep 1954, RAND  Archives/J. Digby Files/Box: Strategic Studies/File: SOC, 1954-1955]; Joseph E. Loftus, Two  Minutes on The Next Ten Years, D(L)-2726 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 14 Feb 1955).  
34 The RAND Corporation: Case Study of a Nonprofit Advisory Corporation, 60–65; The Wizards  of Armageddon, 67–72. According to Bruce Smith (The RAND Corporation), “It was not until  1956 that the bulk of the social scientists finally moved from RAND’s Washington office to  the main headquarters in Santa Monica, California,” 64.  
35 “Arms Competitions: The Status of Analysis,” 8–10; Ernest R. May, John D. Steinbruner, and  Thomas W. Wolfe History of the Strategic Arms Competition, 1945-1972, Alfred Goldberg, ed.  (Washington: Office of the Secretary of Defense Historical Office, Mar 1981) (TOP SECRET//RESTRICTED DATA/NOFORN; Sanitized), Part I, 81–103, 242–333; Part II,  824; Steven J. Zaloga, Target America: The Soviet Union and the Strategic Arms Race, 1945-1964  (Novato: Presidio Press, 1993).  
36 Interview conducted on 29 October 1993. See also “The Development of Strategic Thinking at  the RAND Corporation, 1948-1963: An Economist’s View,” Transcript of Marshall interview  by James Digby and Joan Goldhamer, 2 Aug 1985; Transcript of Marshall interview by Alfred  Goldberg and Maurice Matloff (Historical Office, Office of the Secretary of Defense, 1 Jun  1992), 1–13.  
37 To help devise strategies for the efficient and effective use of nuclear weapons, the Air Force  in 1946 created an independent organization—designated Project RAND and located within  the Douglas Aircraft Company—to conduct research on intercontinental air warfare. By 1948,  the arrangement was proving unworkable. Existing and prospective RAND employees were  leery of working for a subsidiary of an aircraft manufacturer rather than a truly independent  organization, and other aerospace firms began to protest that the existence of RAND gave  Douglas an unfair advantage in the competition for government contracts. Consequently,  RAND officials created an independent nonprofit corporation, the RAND Corporation, to  house Project RAND and its assets. The RAND research agenda was broad, but at its core  was an effort to “make a major scientific attack on the whole theory of warfare, in the broadest  sense of the words.”RAND quickly became one of the nation’s leading centers for research on  nuclear strategy and policy. It also conducted pioneering work in rocketry and space systems,  digital computing, and artificial intelligence. Some of its most influential work was in applied  mathematics and economics. RAND analysts made advances in game theory, modeling and  simulation, cost analysis, and Monte Carlo methods as they sought to improve military decision-making. By the mid-1960s, RAND comprised over 1,100 employees and conducted more  than $23 million of funded research annually. Project RAND Second Annual Report, RA-15075  (1 Mar 1948), 3, quoted in Andrew David May, “The RAND Corporation and the Dynamics  of American Strategic Thought, 1946-1962” (PhD diss., Emory University, 1998) 23. David R.  Jardini, “Out of the Blue Yonder: The RAND Corporation’s Diversification into Social Welfare  Research, 1946-1968,” (Ph.D. diss., Carnegie Mellon University, 1996), 9–11.  
38 Herbert Goldhamer and Andrew W. Marshall, The Frequency of Mental Disease: Long-Term  Trends and Present Status, R-157 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Jul 1949), published as the  book Psychosis and Civilization: Two Studies in the Frequency of Mental Disease (Glencoe: Free  Press, 1953).  
39 The following RAND papers may be related to this effort: Andrew W. Marshall and Joseph E. Loftus, Soviet Military Expenditures, 1955-1963: An Official Summary View (U), D-6365  (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 27 May 1959), SECRET; Andrew W. Marshall and Joseph E.  Loftus, CIA Preliminary Estimates of Soviet Military Expenditures, 1947-1959 (U), D(L)-7085  (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 8 Jan 1960), SECRET.  
40 Michel Crozier, The Bureaucratic Phenomenon (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1964).  
41 According to Fred Kaplan, Loftus joined RAND in late 1954, working in the Washington  office until the end of that year. Kaplan, The Wizards of Armageddon (New York: Simon and  Schuster, 1983), 207, 209, 212.  
42 Hans Heymann, Jr., James C. DeHaven, and Richard C. Raymond, The Soviet Intercontinental  Mission through 1957 (U), R-281 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 1 Aug 1954), CONFIDENTIAL; James C. DeHaven, The Soviet Strategic Base Problem, RM-1302 (Santa Monica:  RAND Corp., 16 Aug 1954), FOUO.  
43 For background on the “criteria problem,” see Charles J. Hitch and Roland N. McKean, The  Economics of Defense in the Nuclear Age (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1960), 158–181;  R.N. McKean, “Criteria,” in Edward S. Quade, ed., Analysis for Military Decisions (Chicago:  Rand McNally & Co., 1967), 81–91. For examples of Marshall’s work in this area, see A.A.  Alchian, G.D. Bodenhorn, S. Enke, C.J. Hitch, J. Hirshleifer, and A.W. Marshall, What Is the  Best System? D-860 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 4 Jan 1951); A. Alchian, J. Hirshleifer, and  A. Marshall, Sound-offs on Pay-offs, D-892 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 20 Jul 1950); A.  Alchian, J. Hirshleifer, and A. Marshall, Report of Cost Team Plus Panel, D-829 (Santa Monica:  RAND Corp., 20 Sep 1950); J. Hirshleifer and A. Marshall, Proposed Payoff Criterion for MSA  [Multiple Strike Analysis], D-817 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 2 Oct 1950); J. Hirshleifer  and A. Marshall, Revised “Best Guess” Salvage Value Assumption for MSA, D-820 (Santa Monica:  RAND Corp., 5 Oct 1950); J. Hirshleifer and A. Marshall, A Proposed Salvage Value Procedure  for MSA, RM-476 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 20 Oct 1950); A.W. Marshall and Stephen  Enke, The Substitution Value of U-235 in Two Assumed Strategic Campaigns (U), D(L)-923 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 20 Apr 1951), SECRET//RESTRICTED DATA (on the subject  of this report, see also Stephen Enke, “Defense Economics: Applying Economic Criteria,”  American Economic Review, 55, no. 2 (May 1965): 418–420; and Stephen Enke, “Some Economic Aspects of Fissionable Material,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 68, no. 2 (May 1954):  217–232; S. Enke, E.W. Lee, and A.W. Marshall, The Deployment of Local Defenses Suggested to  Barlow by Economics, D-935 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 11 May 1951).  
44 Herbert Goldhamer, Human Factors in Systems Analysis, RM-388 (Santa Monica: RAND  Corp., 15 Apr 1950).  
45 A.W. Marshall, On the Accuracy of Immediate Bomb Damage Assessment with Radar Observation of the Bomb Fall (U), D-989 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 6 Aug 1951), SECRET//  RESTRICTED DATA; A.W. Marshall, Coverage and Separation Distance of Point Targets  (U), D-999 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 14 Aug 1951), SECRET//RESTRICTED  DATA; A.W. Marshall, The Estimation of Parameters in a Physical Vulnerability Model, D(L)-  1059 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 24 Oct 1951); A.W. Marshall, Probability, Coverage, and  Multi-element Targets, D(L)-1142 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 15 Jan 1952); Marc Peter, Jr.  and Andrew Marshall, A Re examination of Hiroshima-Nagasaki Damage Data, RM-820 (Santa  Monica: RAND Corp., 1 May 1952), FOUO.  
46 Andrew W. Marshall, “Arms Competitions: The Status of Analysis,” in Uwe Nerlich, ed., The  Western Panacea: Constraining Soviet Power through Negotiation, Volume II of Soviet Power and  Western Negotiating Policies (Cambridge: Ballinger Publishing Co., 1983), 8–10; Ernest R.  May, John D. Steinbruner, and Thomas W. Wolfe, History of the Strategic Arms Competition,  1945-1972, Alfred Goldberg, ed. (Washington: Office of the Secretary of Defense Historical  Office, Mar 1981) (TOP SECRET//RESTRICTED DATA//NOFORN; Sanitized), Part I,  81–103, 242–333; Part Il, 824; Steven J. Zaloga, Target America: The Soviet Union and the Strategic Arms Race, 1945-1964 (Novato: Presidio Press, 1993).  
47 “The Development of Strategic Thinking at the RAND Corporation, 1948-1963: An Economist’s View,” 24–25; Raymond L. Garthoff, Soviet Strategy in the Nuclear Age (New York: Frederick A. Praeger Publishers, 1958), 170–195.
48 H. Kahn and I. Mann, Techniques of Systems Analysis, RM-1829-1 (Santa Monica: RAND  Corp., 3 Dec 1956; revised Jun 1957).  
49 Andrew W. Marshall, Eulogy at Herman Kahn memorial service, National Defense University,  15 Jul 1983.  
50 Bernard Brodie, Strategy in the Missile Age (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1959).  
51 Andrew W. Marshall, “Strategy as a Profession for Future Generations,” in Marshall, J.J. Martin, and Henry S. Rowen, eds., On Not Confusing Ourselves: Essays on National Security Strategy  in Honor of Albert and Roberta Wohlstetter (Boulder: Westview Press, 1991), 305–306; A.J.  Wohlstetter, F.S. Hoffman, R.J. Lutz, and H.S. Rowen, Selection and Use of Strategic Air Bases,  R-266 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Apr 1954; second printing Jun 1962).  
52 On the “missing chapter,” see C. Wolf, Jr., “Working Group I—Improving Policy Analysis:  Introductory Paper,” 17 Jul 1970, A.W. Marshall, “Notes on Improving Policy Analysis: Attachment to Introductory Paper (Working Group I),” 17 Jul 1970, and “Working Group I: Improving Policy Analysis: Summary of Findings,” 23 Jul 1970, in Hans Heymann, Jr., rapporteur,  Bureaucracy and National Security Policy: A Conference Report (Draft), R-644-PR/ARPA (Santa  Monica: RAND Corp., Feb 1971), 57–58, 61–63.  
53 B. Brodie, CJ. Hitch and A.W. Marshall, The Next Ten Years, 0-2700 (Santa Monica: RAND  Corp., 30 Dec 1954).  
54 Minutes of Strategic Objectives Committee (1954—30 Apr, 10 May, 17 May, 24 May, 4 Jun,  25 Jun, 9 Jul, 23 Jul, 6 Aug, 3 Sep, 2 Dec; 1955—21 Jan, 4 Feb, 14 Feb, 7 Mar, 12 Apr, 25 Apr,  7 Jul) (Declassified 13 Dec 1985), RAND Archives/J. Digby Files/Box: Strategic Studies/  File: SOC, 1954-1955. Members of the SOC included Bernard Brodie, James Digby, Charles  Hitch (first chairman), Victor Hunt, Arnold Kramish, James Lipp (second chairman), Andrew  Marshall, Alex Mood, John Williams (third chairman), and, toward the end, Herman Kahn  and Malcolm Hoag.  
55 On the origins of the SOC, see “The Development of Strategic Thinking at the RAND Corporation, 1948-1963: A Radar Engineer’s Point of View,” Transcript of interview of James  Digby by Joan Goldhamer, 2 Jul 1985, 18–20.  
56 R.T. Nichols, STRAP: Summary of Economic Panel Discussions, RM-257 (Santa Monica:  RAND Corp., Oct 1949); Steven T. Ross, American War Plans, 1945-1950 (New York: Garland  Publishing, Inc., 1988); Melvyn P. Leffler, A Preponderance of Power: National Security, the Truman Administration, and the Cold War (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1992); David Alan  Rosenberg, “Toward Armageddon: The Foundations of United States Nuclear Strategy,” PhD  dissertation, University of Chicago, 1983.  
57 C.J. Hitch and W.M. Capron, Implications of Potential Weapon Developments for Strategic Bombing and air Defense: A Preliminary Study, RM-868 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 10 Jul 1952).  
58 Memo, H. Goldhamer, 0. Helmer, A. Marshall, T. Schelling, and M. Weiner to SOFS [Strategic  Offensive Forces Study] and Friends, subj: Results from Attached Questionnaire (U), M-3157,  15 May 1959, CONFIDENTIAL. Some of the results of the survey are cited by Marshall in  Daniel Ellsberg and Paul Kecskemeti, rapporteurs, Minutes of the Monterey Seminar on Active  and Passive Defense, III: Tile Spectrum of Central War Moves, D-774-1 (Santa Monica: RAND  Corp., 24 Oct 1960) (SECRET; Declassified 22 Dec 1975), 5–6, RAND Archives/J. Digby  Files/Box: National Security Seminar; Publications/Correspondence, 1960-1961. Another  questionnaire is mentioned in Memo, Olaf Helmer and Marshall to National Security Seminar  Participants, subj: Attached Questionnaire, M-4857, 30 Aug 1960, RAND Archives/J. Digby  Files/Box: National Security Seminar, Publications/Correspondence, 1960–1961.  
59 The following National Intelligence Estimates, among others, were declassified in full or in part  in late 1994 and can be obtained from the Office of the Information and Privacy Coordinator  at the CIA: SNIE 11-10-57, The Soviet ICBM Program, 10 Dec 1957; NIE 11-5-58, Soviet  Capabilities in Guided Missiles and Space Vehicles, 19 Aug 1958; NIE 11-8-59, Soviet Capabilities for Strategic Attack Through Mid-1964, 9 Feb 1960; NIE 11-5-60, Soviet Capabilities  in Guided Missiles and Space Vehicles, 3 May 1960; NIE 11-8-60, Soviet Capabilities for  Long-Range Attack Through Mid- 1965, 1 Aug 1960; NIE 11-8-61, Soviet Capabilities for  Long-Range Attack, 7 Jun 1961.
60 On von Neumann’s views, see Clay Blair, Jr., “The Passing of a Great Mind,” Life, 42, no. 8 (27  Feb 1957): 96; Steve J. Heims, John von Neumann and Norbert Wiener: From Mathematics to the  Technologies of Life and Death (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1980), 484; Norman Macrae, John von  Neumann (New York: Pantheon Books, 1992), 27–28, 332.  
61 During 1953–1954, John Williams and Bernard Brodie debated preventive war, with Williams  for and Brodie against. See Williams, In Response to Paxson’s Memo on the Probability of war,  D-1513 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 3 Feb 1953); Brodie, A Commentary on Preventative-War Doctrine, D-1715 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 11 Jun 1953), reprinted in Marc  Trachtenberg, ed., The Development of American Strategic Thought: Writings on Strategy, 1952-  1960, Vol. l (New York: Garland Publishing, Inc., 1988), 131–148; Williams, Regarding the  Preventative War Doctrine, D(L)-1777 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 27 Jul 1953); Williams,  Hunting the Tiger (and Other Aspects of the Active Life) (U), S-16 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp.,  26 Mar 1954), SECRET; Memo, Brodie to Williams, subj: Reply to Your M-5110, M-5185,  13 Oct 1954; Memo, Williams to Brodie, subj: The Next Nine Years, 11 Months, M-5372,  25 Oct 1954; Memo, Brodie to Williams, subj: A Moratorium on Similes, M-5484, 1 Nov  1954; Memo, Williams to Brodie, subj: The Subject, M-5598, 5 Nov 1954; Memo, Brodie to  Williams, subj: A Parting Plea, M-5665, 9 Nov 1954. See also Memo, Victor Hunt to Williams, Brodie, and SOC, subj: The Dangers of Bi-polar Discussions, M-5615, 8 Nov 1954;  Memo, Brodie to Hunt, subj: The Dangers of Bi-polar Discussions Circumvented, M-5717, 11  Nov 1954 [All memos are from RAND Archives/J, Digby Files/Box: Strategic Studies/File:  SOC, 1954-1955]. Brodie included a discussion of preventive war in Strategy in the Missile Age  (227–241).  
62 W.W. Kaufmann, Counterforce IV: Summary Briefing, D(L)-7880-PR (Santa Monica: RAND  Corp., 6 Sep 1960); Ltr, William W. Kaufmann to Lt. Col. D.F. Martin, Office, Assistant  for Coordination, Deputy Chief of Staff, Plans and Programs, HQ USAF, 7 Jul 1960, with  attachment, “Informal RAND Reaction to Briefing on Counterforce,” 7 Jul 1960 (SECRET;  Declassified 4 May 1977); Memo, J.F. Digby to The Research Council, subj: Report on War  Fighting Capability Project, 21 Nov 1960; Memo, J.F. Digby to F.R. Collbohm, subj: Information for War Fighting Capability Study, 23 Nov 1960, RAND Archives/J, Digby Files/Box:  Strategic Studies/F: Air Defense, Strategic Studies, 1960.  
63 Rules for an Aggregated War Game, RM-1046-2 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 3 Feb 1954;  revised 27 Jul 1954).  
64 SOC [1960 Committee] minutes, 10 May 1954.  
65 Herbert Goldhamer and Hans Speier, “Some Observations on Political Gaming,” World Politics, 12, no. l (Oct 1959): 71–83; H. Goldhamer, Toward a Cold War Game, D(L)-2607 (Santa  Monica: RAND Corp., 22 Oct 1954); H. Goldhamer, Summary of Cold War Game Activities in  the Social Science Division [First Round], 0-2850 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 12 Apr 1955);  P. Kecskemeti, War Games and Political Games, D-2849 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 15 Apr  1955); P. Kecskemeti, Summary of Cold War Game Activities in the Social Science Division: May  Experiment [Second Round], D-2975-RC (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 20 Jun 1955); H.  Goldhamer, The Political Exercise: A Summary of the Social Science Division’s work on Political  Gaming, with Special Reference to the Third Exercise, D-3164-RC (Santa Monica: RAND Corp.,  1 Sep 1955); E. Schnitzer, Third Political Exercise: Summary and Documents, D-3639 (Santa  Monica: RAND Corp., 1 Sep 1955); E. Schnitzer, Fourth RAND Political Exercise: Summary  and Documents, D-3163 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 25 May 1956); J. Goldsen, The Political  Exercise: An Assessment of the Fourth Round, D-3640-RC (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 30  May 1956).  
66 “In the 1950s, the United States spent about two-thirds as much on air defenses as on nuclear  offensive forces, some $200 billion in ten years (in today’s dollars). In 1960, the United States  actually allocated more to its defenses against Soviet nuclear attack than to its nuclear offensive  forces.” Fred Charles lkle, “Nuclear Strategy: Can There Be a Happy Ending?” Foreign Affairs,  63, no. 4 (Spring 1985): 813.  
67 Garry D. Brewer and Martin Shubik, The War Game: A Critique of Military Problem Solving,  (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1979), 111–114.
68 A.L. Latter, R. Latter, F. Collbohm, W.B. Graham, A.W. Marshall, and E.A. Martinelli, Defense Against Bombers (U), D-10130 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Jun 1962), SECRET//  RESTRICTED DATA; A.L. Latter, James Digby, W.B. Graham, R. Latter, A.W. Marshall,  and E.A. Martinelli, Report of the RAND Ad Hoc Group on Defense (U), RM-3237-PR (Santa  Monica: RAND Corp., Aug 1962), SECRET//RESTRICTED DATA; A.L. Latter, R. Latter, F. Collbohm, W.B. Graham, E.A. Martinelli, and A.W. Marshall, Report of the RAND Ad  Hoc Group on Defense (U), D-10055 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Jun 1962), SECRET//  RESTRICTED DATA.  
69 The mid-50s study effort on strategic warning was called Project HAYLOFT (RAND Project  4028: Indicators of Soviet Intentions). It was done for the Directorate of Intelligence, Office of  the Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations, HQ USAF. The HAYLOFT study group was led  by Joseph Loftus and included Marshall, Robert Belzer, Richard Raymond, Nicholas Rescher,  Pat Keith, and Roberta Wohlstetter. The work of Loftus and Marshall is documented in J.E.  Loftus and A.W. Marshall, The Limitations and Potentialities of the U.S. Strategic Warning System  (U), D-(L)-4944, TS-1710, Classified. This paper is referred to in Joseph E. Loftus and Andrew W. Marshall, RAND Research on the Soviet Military, D-4943-PR (Santa Monica: RAND  Corp., 21 Feb 1958); J.E. Loftus and A.W. Marshall, Strategic Warning: A Proposed Collection  Concept (U), D-6048 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 20 Feb 1959), Classified; J.E. Loftus and  A.W. Marshall, The Structure of the U.S. Warning System (U),D-6064 (Santa Monica: RAND  Corp., 26 Feb 1959), Classified; J.E. Loftus and A.W. Marshall, Soviet Passive Detection Capability (U), D-6300 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 15 May 1959), Classified; Russell T. Nichols,  Economics Diversion Progress Report, D-3740 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 15 Jul 1956), 7;  T.E. Greene and J. Vogel, Engineering Division Activity Report, First Half of 1956, D-3750  (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 15 Jul 1956), 46; Russell T. Nichols, Economic Analysis Department Progress Report, January 15, 1957, D-4052 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 7 Jan 1957);  Russell T. Nichols, Economic Analysis Department Progress Report, D-4398 (Santa Monica:  RAND Corp., 15 Jul 1957), 16–17, 19.  
70 J.E. Loftus and A.W. Marshall, Research on Soviet Military Programs (U), D (L)-6500 (Santa  Monica: RAND Corp., 26 Jun 1959), SECRET; J.E. Loftus and A.W. Marshall, On Improving Midterm Estimates of Soviet Military Capabilities for Use in U.S. Military Planning (U), RM-  2892-PR (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Aug 1962), SECRET; J.E. Loftus and A.W. Marshall, Forecasting Soviet Force Structure: The Importance of Bureaucratic and Budgetary Constraints  (U), RM-3612-PR (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Jul 1963), SECRET; Andrew Marshall,  “Propositions from Case Study on Forecasting Soviet Force Structure,” 20 Jul 1970, in Bureaucracy and National Security Policy: A Conference Report, 46–47.  
71 Chester L Barnard, The Functions of the Executive (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1938);  Herbert A. Simon, Administrative Behavior: A Study of Decision-Making Processes in Administrative Organizations, second edition (New York: Free Press, 1965; first published in 1945); James  G. March and Herbert A. Simon, Organizations (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1958); Richard M. Cyert and James C. March, Behavioral Theory of the Firm (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice  Hall, 1963).  
72 A.W. Marshall and Eugene Brussell, On the Accuracy of Cost Estimates: A Preface, D-5014 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 10 Mar 1958); A.W. Marshall and W.H. Meckling, Predictability  of the Costs, Time, and Success of Development, P-1821 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 14 Oct  1959; revised 11 Dec 1959), in The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity—Economic and Social Factors: A Conference of the Universities-National Bureau Committee for Economic Research and  the committee on Economic Growth for the Social Science Research Council (Princeton: Princeton  University Press, 1962), 461–475.  
73 Herbert Goldhamer and Andrew W. Marshall, with the assistance of Nathan Leites, The Deterrence and Strategy of Total War, 1959-1961: A Method of Analysis, RM-2301 (Santa Monica:  RAND Corp., 30 Apr 1959). An earlier version of this paper is Herbert Goldhamer and  Andrew W. Marshall, The Deterrence and Strategy of Total War,1959-1960 (U), D-5614 (Santa  Monica: RAND Corp., 1 Oct 1958), Classified.  
74 B. Klein, G. Schubert, O. Hoeffding, F. Hoffman, A. Marshall, The NATO Force Planning Exercise: Scope, Aims, and Organization (U), D (L)-12548-ISA (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 15  Jun 1964), Classified; Section on NATO Force Planning Exercise in “Some RAND Products,”  in “RAND Research Results 11” notebook, 16 Sep 1969, RAND Archives/Robert Specht  Files; Ltr, James F. Digby to Henry S. Rowen, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Planning and NSC Office), 6 Dec 1963, with encl, B.H. Klein,  “Progress Report on RAND Participation in the Stikker Exercise (U), 14 Nov 1963 (CONFIDENTIAL; Declassified 23 Dec 1975), RAND Archives/J. Digby Files/Box: Chronological  Files, Memos: Outgoing (Defense), 1949–1951 and 1959–1960.  
75 Albert P. Williams, Jr., The Record and Future Plans for RPN 1412: Decisionmaking Processes in  Military Organizations, WN-7043-PR (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Sep 1970).  
76 Graham T. Allison, Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis (Boston: Little,  Brown & Co., 1971).  
77 Robert Ardrey, The Territorial Imperative: A Personal Inquiry into the Animal Origins of Property  and Nations (New York: Atheneum, 1966).  
78 A.W. Marshall, Problems of Estimating Military Power, P-3417 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp.,  Aug 1966).  
79 A.W. Marshall, Comparisons, R&D Strategy, and Policy Issues (U), WN-7630-DDRE (Santa  Monica: RAND Corp., Oct 1971), SECRET.  
80 According to Don R. Harris (a member of the NSC Net Evaluation Subcommittee), the Net  Technical Assessment staff in DDR&E was created in 1966. MR, Harris, subj: The Current  Status of Net Assessment, 12 Mar 1973, in Capt. James W. Lucas, “Net Assessment and the  Threat.”  
81 Memo, J.R. Schlesinger to H.S. Rowen, subj: Difficulties in and a Mechanism for Partial  RAND Restructuring by DoD Program Packages, 30 Jan 1967; Memo, Draft, Andrew Marshall [to Rowen?], [no subject], 31 Jan 1967; Memo, Andrew Marshall to Harry Rowen, subj:  Possible Focus for RAND work in NonDefense Areas, M-2799, 13 Apr 1967; Memo, A.W.  Marshall and S.G. Winter, Jr. to H.S. Rowen, subj: A RAND Department of “Management  Sciences—The Case in Brief,” M-8668, 29 Dec 1967, RAND Archives.  
82 Schlesinger was RAND’s Director of Strategic Studies from 1967–1969. History Staff, Central  Intelligence Agency, Directors and Deputy Directors of Central Intelligence (Washington: CIA,  1989), 21.  
83 A.W. Marshall, Long-Term Competition with the Soviets: A Framework for Strategic Analysis  (U), R-862-PR (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Apr 1972). See also A.W. Marshall, Long Term  Competition with the Soviets: A Framework for Strategic Analysis, JN-21542-PR (Santa Monica:  RAND Corp., 15 Apr 1971) (CONFIDENTIAL; Declassified 7 May 1980).  
84 The Wizards of Armageddon, 204–219; Gregg Herken, Counsels of War (New York: Alfred A.  Knopf, 1985), 79–81; Marc Trachtenberg, History and Strategy (Princeton: Princeton University  Press, 1991), 27–30.  
85 “Most civilian analysts at Rand simply weren’t allowed to see secret materials, and so exaggerated the difficulty of finding Soviet military targets. That all changed in May of 1960, when the  Soviets shot down one of the CIA’s U-2 spy planes on its way to photograph a missile testing  center at Plesetsk. Not long afterward, Marshall remembers, a Rand analyst stopped him one  day in the parking lot and said, ‘Now I understand what you and Loftus were talking about.’”  Thomas Powers, “Choosing a Strategy for World War III,” The Atlantic Monthly, 250, no. 5  (Nov 1982): 91.  
86 Eds: This conversation was with Helmut Sonnenfeldt and William Hyland in late 1980/early 1981.  
87 On efforts to limit improvements in the delivery accuracies of U.S. ballistic missiles, see Alton  Frye, A Responsible Congress: The Politics of National Security (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1975),  68–83; and Donald MacKenzie, Inventing Accuracy: A Historical Sociology of Nuclear Missile  Guidance (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1990), 268–270.  
88 “As Secretary of Defense, [Schlesinger] recognizes that his function is to provide both intellectual and administrative leadership: ‘You cannot control a department of this size; you have to  guide it,’ he said last week. I’m really a revivalist.”‘ “Watching Birds and Budgets,” Time, 103,  no. 6 (11 Feb 1974), 16. 
89 R.W. Komer, Bureaucracy Does Its Thing: The Impact of Institutional Constraints on US/GVN  Performance in the Vietnam War, WN-7244-ARPA (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Feb 1971),  FOUO.  
90 G. Warren Nutter, Some Observations on Soviet Industrial Growth, Occasional Paper 55 (New  York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1957); G. Warren Nutter, Growth of Industrial  Production in the Soviet Union (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1962).  
91 The Wizards of Armageddon, 204–219; History and Strategy, 3–46; Barry H. Steiner, Bernard  Brodie and the Foundations of American Nuclear Strategy (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas,  1991), passim.  
92 Roberta Wohlstetter, Pearl Harbor: Warning and Decision (Stanford: Stanford University Press,  1962).  
93 “The initial stimulus for the book came from my friend, Andrew W. Marshall. For constant  encouragement and advice through five years of research I am especially grateful to him and  to Bernard Brodie and Harvey DeWeerd.” Ibid., xi. Wohlstetter’s work for the book was done  as part of Project HAYLOFT. Economics Division Progress Report, 7; Social Science Division,  Social Science Division Progress Report, June 30, 1956, D-3730 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 11  Jul 1956), 4.  
94 Report to the President by the Security Resources Panel of the Office of Defense Mobilization  Science Advisory Committee, “Deterrence and Survival in the Nuclear Age,” 7 Nov 1957  (TOP SECRET; Declassified 10 Jan 1973), in Department of State, Foreign Relations of the  United States, 1955-1957, Vol. 19: National Security Policy (Washington: GPO, 1990), 639–661.  While on the staff of the Gaither Committee, Marshall was a member of a “small group [of]  people with systems analysis-analytical kinds of skills [that] worked as consultants and experts  to people in [the] other panels [and did] various kinds of tasks.” Transcript of interview of  Marshall by Goldberg and Matloff, 1 Jun 1992, 8. An organization chart for the committee  shows an “Evaluation Quantitative Assessments” group headed by Robert C. Prim (Bell Telephone Labs) and Stanley J. Lawwill (Strategic Air Command).  Albert Wohlstetter, “The Delicate Balance of Terror,” Foreign Affairs, 37, no. 2 (Jan 1959):  211–234.  
95 Morton H. Halperin, “The Gaither Committee and the Policy Process,” World Politics, 13, no.  3 (Apr 1961): 360–384; The Wizards of Armageddon, 125–127; Net Evaluation Subcommittee  Folders, 1955-1964, Box 66, Records of the National Security Council, Record Group 273,  National Archives.  
96 Security Resources Panel of the Office of Defense Mobilization Science Advisory Committee,  Active Defense and SAC Vulnerability, 27 Nov 1957 (TOP SECRET//RESTRICTED DATA;  Declassified 11 Sep 1992), Declassified Documents Collection, 1993/001293.  
97 A.W. Marshall and J.F. Digby, Indications of Imminent Hostilities (U), D-1477 (Santa Monica:  RAND Corp., 29 Dec 1952), CONFIDENTIAL; A.W. Marshall and J.F. Digby, The Military  Value of Advanced Warning of Hostilities and its Implications for Intelligence indicators (U), SM-14  (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 20 Jul 1953), TOP SECRET (classification probably has been  downgraded to CONFIDENTIAL or the document has been declassified). Digby discusses  this work briefly in “Contributions of RAND to Strategy in the 1950s,” in On Not Confusing  Ourselves: Essays On National Security Strategy in Honor of Albert and Roberta Wohlstetter, 22. A  short summary of SM-14 appears in Merton E. Davies and William R. Harris, RAND’s Role in  the Evolution of Balloon and Satellite Observation Systems and Related Space Technology, R-3692-  RC (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., Sep 1988), 49.  
98 A.W. Marshall and H.A. DeWeerd, Weapons Limitations and the Defense of Western Europe,  D-3785 (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 27 Jul 1956); A.W. Marshall and H.A. DeWeerd,  Weapons Limitations, Nuclear Sharing, and Graduated Deterrence—A Report on a Trip to Washington, SHAPE, USAFE, and the United Kingdom, October 29–November 29, 1956, D(L)-4037-PR  (Santa Monica: RAND Corp., 26 Dec 1956) [KC]. Another DeWeerd-Marshall paper, Nuclear Weapons Limitations and NATO, P-1013, 16 Jan 1957 is listed in Social Science Division, Social Science Division Progress Report, June 30 1957, D-4396-PR (Santa Monica: RAND Corp.,  1 Jul 1957).
99 According to Kaplan, Loftus joined the Target Programs office, Air Target Division, Air Force  Intelligence in June 1950. The Wizards of Armageddon, 209. As of May 1949, Loftus was Director of the Teaching Institute at American University. Joseph E. Loftus, “Strategy, Economics,  and the Bomb,” The Scientific Monthly, 68, no. 5 (May 1949): 310–320.  
100 As noted earlier, Kaplan (The Wizards of Armageddon) says Loftus joined RAND in late 1954.  
101 J.E. Loftus, The CROSSBOW Campaign Against the V-2 Missile Threat, D-6823 (Santa  Monica: RAND Corp., 30 Sep 1959). A Sep 1960 RAND memo refers to a related AWM  paper “in preparation,” Lessons from the Crossbow Campaign for Contemporary Considerations,  D-6824. Memo, E.S. Quade to Concept Group, National Security Seminar, subj: Seventh  Concept Group Meeting, Wednesday, September 28, 9:00 A.M., Main Conference Room,  M-5338, 21 Sep 1960, with attachment, “Publications of Possible Interest to the Concept  Group, National Security Seminar,” 21 Sep 1960, RAND Archives/J. Digby Files/Box: National Security Seminar, Publications/Correspondence, 1960–1961.  
102 William J. Broad, “Russia Has ‘Doomsday’ Machine, U.S. Expert Says,” The New York Times,  8 Oct 1993, A6; Bruce G. Blair, “Russia’s Doomsday Machine,” The New York Times, 8 Oct  1993, A35.